PLAYER'S HANDBOOK'

I

I -',

)"

,
)

,.

\

~...'. .

••


CREDITS Additional Contributors: Kim Mohan, Mal! Sernel!,
Chris Dupuis, Tom LaPille, Richard Baker, Miranda Horner,
0&0 Lead Designers: Mike Mearls, Jeremy Crawford Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, Steve Winter, Nina Hess,
Steve Townshend, Chris Youngs, Ben Petrisor, Tom Olsen
P/aye,'s Handbaok Lead: jeremy Crawford
Rules Development: Rodney Thompson, Peter Lee Project Management: Neil Shinkle, Kim Graham, John Hay
Writing: James Wyatt, Robert J. Schwalb, Bruce R. Cordell Production Services: Cynda Callaway, Brian Dumas,
Editing: Michele Carter, Chris Sims, Scol! Fitzgerald Gray,
Jefferson Dunlap, David Gershman, Anita Williams
Christopher Perkins
Producer: Greg Bilsland Brand and Marketing: Nathan Stewart, Liz Schuh,
Chris Lindsay, Shelly Mazzanoble, Hilary Ross,
Art Directors: Kate Irwin, Dan Gelon, Jon Schindehette, Laura Tommervik, Kim Lundstrom, Trevor Kidd
Mari Kolkowsky, Melissa Rapier, Shauna Narciso
Based on the original game created by
Graphic Designers: Bree Heiss, Emi Tanji, Barry Craig E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson,
Cover IlIustrator: Tyler Jacobson with Brian Blume, Rob Kuntz, james Ward, and Don Kaye
Interior IIlustrators: Steve Argyle, Tom Babbey, Daren Bader,
Drawing from further development by
Drew Baker, Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, Christopher Bradley, j. Eric Holmes, Tom Moldvay, Frank Mentzer, Aaron Allston,
Noah Bradley, Sam Burley, Clint Cearley, Milivoj Ceran, Harold Johnson, Roger E. Moore, David "Zeb" Cook, Ed
Sidharth Chaturvedi, Jedd Chevrier, jD, Allen Douglas, Greenwood, Tracy Hickman, Margaret Weis, Douglas Niles,
Jesper Ejsing, Craig Elliott, Wayne England, Scott M. Fischer, jeffGrubb, Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams,
Randy Gallegos, Justin Gerard, Florian De Gesincourt, Lars Richard Baker, Peter Adkison, Keith Baker, Bill Slavicsek,
Grant-West, Jon Hodgson, Ralph Horsley, Lake Hurwitz, Andy Collins, and Rob Heinsoo
Tyler Jacobson, Kekai Kotaki, Olly Lawson, Raphael Lübke,
Titus Lunter, Slawomir Maniak, Brynn Metheney, Aaran Playtesting provided by
Miller, Christopher Moeller, Mark Molnar, Scott Murphy, over 175,000 fans of D&D. Thank you!
William O'Connor, Hector Ortiz, David Palumbo, Alessandra
Pisa no, Claudio Pozas, Rob Rey, Wayne Reynolds, Aaron J. Additional consultation provided by
Riley, Chris Seaman, Cynthia Sheppard, Craig J Spearing, JeffGrubb, Kenneth Hite, Kevin Kulp, Robin Laws,
John Stanko, Matt Stawicki, Alex Stone, Thom Tenery, Cory S. John Ross, the RPGPundit, Vincent Venturella, and Zak S.
Trego-Erdner, Beth Tratt, Autumn Rain Turkel, jose Vega,
Tyler Walpole, Julian Kok Joon Wen, Richard Whitters, Eva
Widermann, Ben Wootten, Kieran Yanner

ON lHE COVER

In this fiery scene illustrated by Tyler
Jacobson, the fire giant King Snurre,
suffering no fools to live, calls his hell
hounds to join him in confronting
unwelcome guests in his home.

Disc/a;mer: W;zards afIne Coost ;5 nal responsible for the consequences of sp/itting up lhe parl'l, sliding oppendages in lhe maulh af Q leering green devi/face, occepting a dirlrler ;"1';101;0"

iram bugbears, storming lhe ftas! hall of Q hill g;ont steading, angering o dragon af eln)' ",ariely, or saying yes when lhe DM asks. "Are you real/I' 5ure?"

620A9217000001 EN CE
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6560-1
First Printing: August 2014

987654321

DUNGEONS & ORAGONS. 0&0, Wízards ofthe (oast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand. Player's Handbook. Monster Manual, Dungeon Moste,'s Gtúde, ali other Wizards af
the Caast praduct names, and their respective logos are trademarks arwizards ofthe Coast in lhe USA and other counlries. Ali characters and their distinctive likenesses are property
orWizards ofthe Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws or the United States of America. Any reproduction or unaulhorized use ofthe material or artwork contained
herein is prohibited without the express written permission ofWizards of the Coast.

Printed in the USA. @2014 Wizards or the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057.0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile.Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH.
Represented by Hasbm ElImpe 4 lhe SQlJare Stockley park Uxbrjdge Mjddlesex !lBU lEI LJK


CONTENTS

PREFACE 4 PART2 171

INTRODUCTION 5 CHAPTER 7: USING ABILITY SCORES 173
Ability Scores and Modifiers 173
Worlds of Adventure 5 Advantage and Oisadvantage 173
Using This Book 6 Proficiency Bonus 173
How to Play 6 Ability Checks 174
Adventures 7 Using Each Ability 175
Saving Throws 179
PART 1 9 181
CHAPTER 8: ADVENTURING 181
CHAPTER 1: STEP-By-STEP CHARACTERS ll 181
Beyond 1st Level 15 Time 183
Movement 185
CHAPTER 2: RACES 17 The Environment 186
Choosing a Race 17 Social Interaction 186
Owarf 18 Resting 189
Elf 21 Between Adventures 189
Hal fiing 26 190
Human 29 CHAPTER 9: COMBAT 192
Oragonborn 32 193
Gnome 35 The Order of Combat 196
Half.Elf 38 Movement and Position 196
Half-Orc 40 Actions in Combat 198
Tiefling .42 Making an Attack 198
Cover
CHAPTER 3: CLASSES 45 Oamage and Healing 199
Ba rbaria n 46 Mounted Combat...
Bard 51 Underwater Combat 201
Cleric 56 201
Oruid 64 PART3 202
Fighter 70 207
Monk 76 CHAPTER 10: SPELLCASTING 207
Paladin 82 What Is a Spell? 211
Ranger 89 Casting a Spell
Rogue 94 290
Sorcerer 99 CHAPTER 11: SPELLS :
Warlock 105 Spe11Lists 293
Wizard 112 Spel1 Oescriptions
300
121 ApPENDIX A: CONDITIONS 300
121 301
CHAPTER 4: PERSONALITY AND 125 ApPENDIX B:
125 304
BACKG ROUN D GODS OF THE MULTIVERSE
143 312
Character Oetails 143 ApPENDIX C:
Inspiration 143 THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE 313
Backgrounds 144
146 The Material Planc 317
CHAPTER 5: EQUIPMENT 148 Beyond the Material
154
Starting Equipment... 155 ApPENDIX D:
Wealth 157
Armor and Shields 157 CREATURE STATISTICS
Weapons 159
Adventuring Gear ApPENDIX E:
Tools 163 INSPIRATIONAL READING
Mounts and Vehicles 163
Trade Goods 165
Expenses
Tri n kets

CHAPTER 6: CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS INDEX
MuIticlassi ng
Feats CHARACTER SHEET


PREFACE are !ikely to end up friends. It's a cool side effect of the
game. Your next gaming group is as close as the nearest
NCE UPON A TIME, LONG, LONG AGO, IN A game store, on!ine forum, or gaming convention.

realm called the Midwestern United The second thing you need is a lively imagination
States-specifically the states of Minne- or, more importantly, the willingness to use whatever
sota and Wisconsin-a group of friends imagination you have. Vou don't need to be a master
gathered together to forever alter the storyteller or a brilliant artist. Vou just need to aspire to
history of gaming. create, to have the courage of someone who is willing to
build something and share it with others.
1twasn't their intent to do so. They were
tired of merely reading tales about worlds of magic, Luckily. just as 0&0 can strengthen your friendships,
monsters, and adventure. They wanted to play in those it can help build in you the confidence to create and
worlds, rather than observe them. That they went on share. 0&0 is a game that teaches you to look for the
to invent OUNGEONS & ORAGONS, and thereby ignite a clever solution, share the sudden ide a that can overcome
revolution in gaming that continues to this day, speaks a problem, and push yourself to imagine what could be,
to two things. rather than simply accept what is.

First, it speaks to their ingenuity and genius in fig- The first characters and adventures you create will
uring out that games were the perfect way to explore probably be a collection of clichés. That's true of every-
worlds that could not otherwise exist. Almost every one, from the greatest Dungeon Masters in history on
modern game, whether played on a digital device or down. Accept this rea!ity and move on to create the
a tabletop, owes some debt to 0&0. second character or adventure, which will be betler,
and then the third, which will be betler still. Repeat that
Second, it is a testament to the inherent appeal of the over the course of time, and soon you'lI be able to create
game they created. OUNGEONS & ORAGONS sparked a anything, from a character's background story to an epic
thriving global phenomenon. [t is the first roleplaying world of fantasy adventure.
game, and it remains one of the best of its breed.
Once you have that skill, it's yours forever. Countless
To play 0&0. and to play it well, you don't need to writers, artists, and other creators can trace their begin-
read ali the rules, memorize every detail of the game, nings to a few pages of 0&0 notes, a handful of dice,
or master the fine art of rolling funny looking dice. and a kitchen table.
None of those things have any bearing on what's best
about the game. Above ali else, 0&0 is yours. The friendships you
make around the table will be unique to you. The adven-
What you need are two things, the first being friends tures you embark on. the characters you create, the
with whom you can share the game. Playing games with memories you make-these will be yours. 0&0 is your
your friends is a lot of fun, but 0&0 does something personal corner of the universe, a place where you have
more than entertain. free reign to do as you wish.

Playing 0&0 is an exerci se in collaborative creation. Go forth now. Read the rules of the game and the
Vou and your friends create epic stories filled with ten- story of its worlds, but always remember that you are
sion and memorable drama. Vou create silly in-jokes the one who brings them to !ife. They are nothing
that make you laugh years later. The dice will be cruel without the spark of !ife that you give them.
to you. but you will soldier on. Your collective creativ-
ity will build stories that you will tell again and again. Mike Mearls
ranging from the utlerly absurd to the stuff of legend. May 2014

If you don't have friends interested in playing, don't
worry. There's a special alchemy that takes place
around a 0&0 table thal nothing else can match. Play
the game with someone enough, and the two of you

PREFACE


INTRODUCTION In the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame, each player
creates an adventurer (also called a character) and
HEDUNGEONS& DRAGONSROLEPLAYING teams up with other adventurers (played by friends).
game is about storytelling in worlds of Working together, the group might explore a dark dun-
swords and sorcery. !t shares elements geon, a ruined city, a haunted castle. a lost temple deep
with childhood games of make-believe. Like in a jungle, or a lava-filled cavero beneath a mysterious
those games, 0&0 is driven by imagina- mountain. The adventurers can solve puzzles, talk with
tion. !t's about picturing the towering castle other characters, battle fantastic monsters, and discover
beneath the stormy night sky and imagining fabulous magic items and other treasure.
howa fantasy adventurer might react to the challenges
that scene presents. One player, however, takes on the role of the Dungeon
Master (DM). the game's lead storyteller and referee.
Oungeon Master (OM): After passing through the The DM creates adventures for the characters, who nav-
craggy peaks, the road takes a sudden turn to the east igate its hazards and decide which paths to explore. The
and Castle Ravenloft towers before you. Crumbling DM might describe the entrance to Castle Ravenloft,
towers of stone keep a silent watch over the approach. and the players decide what they want their adventurers
They look like abandoned guardhouses. Beyond these, to do. WilI they walk across the dangerously weathered
a wide chasm gapes, disappearing into the deep drawbridge? Tie themselves together with rope to mini-
fog below. A lowered drawbridge spans the chasm, mize the chance that someone will fali if the drawbridge
leading to an arched entrance to the castle courtyard. gives way? Or cast a spell to carry them over the chasm?
The chains of the drawbridge creak in the wind, their
rust.eaten iron straining with the weight. From atop Then the DM determines the results of the adventur-
the high strong walls, stone gargoyles stare at you ers' actions and narrates what they experience. Because
from hollow sockets and grin hideously. A rotting the DM can improvise to react to anything the players
wooden portcullis, green with growth, hangs in the attempt, 0&0 is infinitely f1exible, and each adventure
entry tunnel. Beyond this, the main doors ofCastle can be exciting and unexpected.
Ravenloft stand open, a rich warm light spilling into
the courtyard. The game has no real end; when one story or quest
wraps up, another one can begin, creating an ongoing
Phillip (playing Gareth): I want to look at the story called a campaign. Many people who play the
gargoyles. I have a feeling they're not just statues. game keep their campaigns going for months or years.
meeting with their friends every week or so to pick
Amy (playing Rival:The drawbridge looks precarious? up the story where they left off. The adventurers grow
I want to see how sturdy it is. Do I think we can cross in might as the campaign continues. Each monster
it, or is it going to collapse under our weight? defeated, each adventure completed, and each treasurc
recovered not only adds to the continuing story, but also
Unlike a game of make-believe, 0&0 gives structure earos the adventurers new capabilities. This increase
to the stories, a way of determining the consequences in power is reflected by an adventurer's leveI.
of the adventurers' action. Players roll dice to resolve
whether their attacks hit or miss or whether their adven- There's no winning and losing in the DUNGEONS&
turers can scale a cliff, roll away from the strike of a DRAGONSgame-at least, not the way those terms are
magicallightning bolt, or pull off some other dangerous usually understood. Together, the DM and lhe players
task. Anything is possible, but the dice make some out- create an exciting story of bold adventurers who confront
comes more probable than others. deadly perils. Sometimes an adventurer might come to
a grisly end, toro apart by ferocious monsters or done in
Oungeon Master (OM): OK, one at a time. Phillip, bya nefarious villain. Even so, the other adventurers can
you're looking at the gargoyles? search for powerful magic to revive their fallen comrade,
or the player might choose to create a new character to
Phillip: Yeah. 15 there any hint they might be carry on. The group might fail to complete an adventure
creatures and not decorations? successfully, but if everyone had a good time and created
a memorable story, they ali win.
OM: Make an Intelligence check.
Phillip: Does my Investigation skill apply? WORLDS OF ADVENTURE
OM: Sure!
Phillip (rolling a d20): Ugh. Seven. The many worlds of the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame
OM: They look like decorations to you. And Amy, are places of magic and monsters, of brave warriors and
Riva is checking out the drawbridge? spectacular adventures. They begin with a foundation
of medieval fantasy and then add the creatures, places,
and magic that make these worlds unique.

The worlds of the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame exist
within a vast cosmos called the multiverse, connected
in strange and mysterious ways to one another and to
other planes of existence. such as the Elemental Plane
of Fire and the lnfinite Depths of the Abyss. Within

lNTRODUl TION


this multiverse are an endless variety of worlds. Many 2. The players describe what they want to do. Some-
of them have been published as official settings for the times one player speaks for the whole party, saying,
D&D game. The legends of the Forgotten Realms, Drag- "We'lI take the east door," for example. Other times,
onlance, Greyhawk, Dark Sun, Mystara, and Eberron different adventurers do different things: one adventurer
settings are woven together in the fabric of the multi- might search a treasure chest while a second examines
verse. Alongside these worlds are hundreds of thousands an esoteric symbol engraved on a wall and a third keeps
more, created by generations of D&D players for their watch for monsters. The players don't need to take
own games. And amid ali the richness of the multiverse, turns, but the DM listens to every player and decides
you might create a world of your own. how to resolve those actions.

Ali these worlds share characteristics, but each world Sometimes, resolving a task is easy. If an adventurer
is set apart by its own history and cultures, distinctive wants to walk across a roam and open a door, the DM
monsters and races, fantastic geography, anciem dun- might just say that the door opens and describe what
geons, and scheming villains. Some races have unusual lies beyond. But the doar might be locked, the floor
traits in different worlds. The halflings of the Dark Sun might hide a deadly trap, or some other circumstance
setting, for example, are jungle-dwelling cannibals, might make it challenging for an adventurer to complete
and the elves are desert nomads. Some worlds feature a task. In those cases, the DM decides what happens,
races unknown in other settings, such as Eberron's war- often relying on the roll of a die to determine the results
forged, soldiers created and imbued with life to fight in of an action.
the Last War. Some worlds are dominated by one great
story, like the War of the Lance that plays a central role 3. The DM narrates the results ofthe adventurers'
in the Dragonlance setting. But they're ali D&D worlds, actions. Describing the results often leads to another
and you can use the rules in this book to create a char- decision point, which brings the flow of the game right
acter and play in any one of them. back to step 1.

Your DM might set the campaign on one of these This pattern holds whether the adventurers are cau-
worlds or on one that he or she created. Because there tiously exploring a ruin, talking to a devious prince, or
is so much diversity among the worlds of D&D, you locked in mortal combat against a mighty dragon. In
should check with your DM about any house rules that certain situations, particularly combat, the action is
will affect your play of the game. Ultimately, the Dun- more structured and the players (and DM) do take turns
geon Master is the authority on the campaign and its choosing and resolving actions. But most of the time,
setting, even if the setting is a published world. play is fluid and flexible, adapting to the circumstances
of the adventure.
USING THIS BOOK
Often the action of an adventure takes place in the
The Player's Handbook is divided into three parts. imagination of the players and DM, relying on the DM's
Part 1 is about creating a character, providing the verbal descriptions to set the scene. Some DMs like to
use music, art, ar recorded sound effects to help set the
rules and guidance you need to make the character mood, and many players and DMs alike adopt different
you'lI play in the game. It includes information on the voices for the various adventurers, monsters, and other
various races, classes, backgrounds, equipment, and characters they play in the game. Sometimes, a DM
other customization options that you can choose from. might lay out a map and use tokens ar miniature figures
Many of the rules in part 1 rely on material in parts 2 to represent each creature involved in a scene to help
and 3. If you come across a game concept in part 1 that the players keep track of where everyone is.
you don't understand, consult the book's indexo
GAME DrCE
Part 2 details the rules of how to play the game,
beyond the basics described in this introduction. That The game uses polyhedral dice with different numbers
part covers the kinds of die rolls you make to determine of sides. Vou can find dice like these in game stores and
success or failure at the tasks your character attempts, in many bookstores.
and describes the three broad categories of activity in
the game: exploration, interaction, and combat. In these rules, the different dice are referred to by the
letter d followed by the number of sides: d4, d6, dS, dI O,
Part 3 is ali about magic. It covers the nature of magic d12, and d20. For instance, a d6 is a six-sided die (the
in the worlds of D&D, the rules for spellcasting, and the typical cube that many games use).
huge variety of spells available to magic-using charac-
ters (and monsters) in the game. Percentile dice, ar d100, work a little differently. Vou
generate a number between 1 and 100 by rolling two
HOWTO PLAY different ten-sided dice numbered from Oto 9. One die
(designated before you roll) gives the tens digit, and
The play of the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame unfolds the other gives the ones digit. If you roll a 7 and a 1, for
according to this basic pattern. example, the number rolled is 71. Two Os represent 100.
Some ten-sided dice are numbered in tens (00, 10, 20,
1. The DM describes the environment. The DM and so on), making it easier to distinguish the tens digit
tells the players where their adventurers are and what's from the ones digit. In this case, a roll of 70 and I is 71,
around them, presenting the basic scope of options that and 00 and O is 100.
present themselves (how many doors lead out of a roam,
what's on a table, who's in the tavern, and so on). When you need to roll dice, the rules tell you how
many dice to roll of a certain type, as well as what mod-
ifiers to add. For example, "3dS + 5" means you roll

6 INTRODUCTION


three eight-sided dice, add them together, and add 5 3. Compare the total to a target number. If the total
to the tota!. equals or exceeds the target number, the ability check,
attack roll, or saving throw is a success. Otherwise, it's
The same d notation appears in the expressions "ld3" a failure. The DM is usually the one who determines
and "ld2." To simulate the roll of Id3, roll a d6 and target numbers and tells players whether their ability
divide the number rolled by 2 (round up). To simulate checks, attack rolls, and saving throws succeed or fai!'
the roll of Id2, roll any die and assign a I or 2 to the roll
depending on whether it was odd or even. (Alternatively, The target number for an ability check or a saving
if the number rolled is more than half the number of throw is called a Difficulty Class (DC). The target
sides on the die, it's a 2.) number for an attack roll is called an Armor Class (AC).

THE D20 This sim pie rule governs the resolution of most tasks
in D&D play. Chapter 7 provides more detailed rules for
Does an adventurer's sword swing hurt a dragon or just using the d20 in the game.
bounce off its iron-hard scales? Will the ogre believe an
outrageous bluff? Can a character swim across a raging ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE
river? Can a character avoid the main blast of a fireball,
or does he or she take full damage from the blaze? In Sometimes an ability check, attack roll, or saving throw
cases where the outcome of an action is uncertain, is modified by special situations called advantage and
the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame relies on rolls of a disadvantage. Advantage reflects the positive circum-
20-sided die, a d20, to determine success or failure. stances surrounding a d20 roll, while disadvantage
reflects the opposite. When you have either advantage or
Every character and monster in the game has capa- disadvantage, you roll a second d20 when you make the
bilities defined by six ability scores. The abilities are roll. Use the higher of the two rolls if you have advan-
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, tage, and use the lower roll if you have disadvantage.
and Charisma, and they typically range from 3 to 18 For example, if you have disadvantage and roll a 17 and
for most adventurers. (Monsters might have scores as a 5, you use the 5. If you instead have advantage and roll
lowas I or as high as 30.) These ability scores, and the those numbers, you use the 17.
ability modifiers derived from them, are the basis for
almost every d20 roll that a player makes on a charac- More detailed rules for advantage and disadvantage
ter's or monster's behalf. are presented in chapter 7.

Ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws are the SPECIFIC BEATS GENERAL
three main kinds of d20 rolls, forming the core of the
rules of the game. AIl three follow these simple steps. This book contains rules, especially in parts 2 and 3,
that govern how the game plays. That said, many racial
1. Roll the die and add a modifier. Roll a d20 and traits, class features, spells, magic items, monster abili-
add the relevant modifier. This is typically the mod- ties, and other game elements break the general ruIes in
ifier derived from one of the six ability scores, and it some way, creating an exception to how the rest of the
sometimes includes a proficiency bonus to reflect a char- game works. Remember this: lf a specific ruIe contra-
acter's particular skill. (See chapter I for details on each dicts a general rule, the specific rule wins.
ability and how to determine an ability's modifier.)
Exceptions to the rules are often minor. For instance,
2. Apply circumstantial bonuses and penalties. A many adventurers don't have proficiency with longbows,
class feature, a spell, a particular circumstance, ar some but every wood elf does because of a racial trait. That
other effect might give a bonus or penalty to the check. trait creates a minor exception in the game. Other
examples of rule-breaking are more conspicuous. For
instance, an adventurer can't normally pass through 7
walls, but some spells make that possible. Magic
accounts for most of the major exceptions to the rules.

ROUND DOWN

There's one more general rule you need to know at the
outset. Whenever you divide a number in the game,
round down if you end up with a fraction, even if the
fraction is one-half or greater.

ADVENTURES

The DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame consists of a group
of characters embarking on an adventure that the Dun-
geon Master presents to them. Each character brings
particular capabilities to the adventure in the form of
ability scores and skills, class features, racial traits,
equipment, and magic items. Every character is dif-
ferent, with various strengths and weaknesses, so the
best party of adventurers is one in which the characters
complement each other and cover the weaknesses of

INTRODUCTION


their companions. The advenlurers musl coopera te to that a captured scout reveal the secret entrance to the
successfully complete the adventure. goblin lair, getting information from a rescued prisoner,
pleading for mercy from an ore chieftain, or persuading
The adventure is the heart of the game, a story with a talkative magic mirror to show a dislant location to
a beginning, a middle, and an end. An adventure might the advenlurers.
be created by the Dungeon Master or purchased off the
shelf, tweaked and modified to suit the DM's needs and The rules in chapters 7 and 8 support exploration and
desires. In either case, an adventure features a fantastic social interaclion, as do many c1ass features in chapler 3
selting, whether it's an underground dungeon, a crum- and personality traits in chapter 4.
bling castle, a stretch of wilderness, or a bustIing city.
It features a rieh cast of characters: the adventurers Combat, the focus of chapter 9, involves characters
created and played by the other players at the table, and other creatures swinging weapons, casting spells,
as well as nonplayer characters (NPCs). Those char- maneuvering for position, and so on-all in an effort
acters might be palrons, allies, enemies, hirelings, or to defeat their opponents, whether that means killing
just background extras in an adventure. Often, one of every enemy, laking captives, or forcing a rout. Combat
the NPCs is a villain whose agenda drives much of an is the most struclured element of a D&D session, with
adventure's action. creatures taking turns to make sure that everyone gets
a chance to act. Even in the contexl of a pitched battIe,
Over the course of their adventures, the characters there's still plenty of opportunity for adventurers to
are confronted bya variety of creatures, objects, and altempt wacky stunts like surfing down a lIight of stairs
situations that they must deal with in some way. Some- on a shield, to examine the environment (perhaps by
times the adventurers and other creatures do their pulling a mysterious lever), and lOinteract with other
best to kill or capture each other in combat. At other creatures, including allies, enemies, and neutral parties.
times, the adventurers talk to another creature (or even
a magical object) with a goal in mind. And often, the THE WONDERS OF MAGIC
adventurers spend time trying to solve a puzzIe, bypass
an obstacle, find something hidden, or unraveI the cur- Few D&D adventures end without something magical
rent situation. Meanwhile, the adventurers explore the happening. Whether helpful or harmful, magie appears
worId, making decisions about which way lo traveI and frequently in the life of an advenlurer, and it is the focus
what they'1I try to do next. of chapters 10 and 11.

Adventures vary in length and complexity. A short In the worlds of DUNGEONS& DRAGONSp, ractitioners
adventure might present only a few challenges, and of magic are rare, set apart from the masses of people
it might take no more than a single game session to by their extraordinary talent. Common foIk l11ightsee
complete. A long adventure can involve hundreds of evidcnce of magic on a regular basis, but it's usually
combats, interactions, and other challenges, and take minor-a fantastic monster, a visibly answered prayer,
dozens of sessions to play through, stretching over a wizard walking through the streets with an animated
weeks or months of real time. Usually, the end of an shieId guardian as a bodyguard.
adventure is marked by the adventurers heading back to
civilization to rest and enjoy the spoils of their labors. For adventurers, though, magic is key to their sur-
viva\. Without the healing magie of c1erics and paladins,
Sut that's not the end of the story. Vou can think of adventurers would quickly succumb to their wounds.
an adventure as a single episode of a TV series, made Wilhout the uplifting magieal support of bards and
up of multiple exciting scenes. A campaign is the whole c1erics, warriors might be overwhelmed by powerful
series-a string of adventures joined together, with a foes. Withoul the sheer magieal power and versatility
consistent group of advenlurcrs following the narrative of wizards and druids, every threat would bc mag-
from start to finish. nified tenfold.

THE THREE PILLARS OF ADVENTURE Magic is also a favored tool of villains. Many adven-
tures are driven by the machinations of spellcaslers
Adventurers can try to do anything their players can who are hellbent on using magic for some ill end. A cult
imagine, bul it can be helpful to talk about their activ- leader seeks to awaken a god who slumbers beneath
ities in three broad categories: exploration, social the sea, a hag kidnaps youths to magically drain them
interaction, and combat. of lheir vigor, a mad wizard labors to invest an army of
automatons with a facsimile of life, a dragon begins a
ExpIoration includes both lhe adventurers' movement mystical ritual to rise up as a god of destruction-these
through the worId and their interaction with objects and are just a few of the magical threats that adventurers
situations that require their altention. Exploration is the might face. With magic of their own, in the form of
give-and-take of the players describing what lhey wanl spells and magic items, the adventurers might prevail!
their characters lO do, and the Dungeon Master telling
the players whal happens as a result. On a large scale,
that might involve lhe characters spending a day cross-
ing a rolling plain or an hour making lheir way through
caverns underground. On the smallest scale, il could
mean one characler pulling a lever in a dungeon room lo
see what happens.

Social interaction features the advenlurers talking to
someone (or something) else. lt might mean demanding

8 INTRODUCTION


PARTl

PART 1 CREi\TING H!\RA

9


CHAPTER 1: STEP-By-STEP CHARACTERS

OURFIRSTSTEPINPLAYINAGNADVENTUREINRTHE classes (see step 2). For example, the racial traits of
DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame is to imagine lightfoot halflings make them exceptional rogues, and
and create a character of your own. Your high elves tend to be powerful wizards. Sometimes
character is a combination of game statistics, playing against type can be fun, too. Half-orc paladins
roleplaying hooks, and your imagination. Vou and mountain dwarf wizards, for example, can be
choose a race (such as human or halfling) and unusual but memorable characters.
a class (such as fighter or wizard). Vou also
invent the personality, appearance, and backstory of Your race also increases one or more of your ability
your character. Once completed, your character serves scores, which you determine in step 3. Note these
as your representative in the game, your avatar in the increases and remember to apply them later.
DUNGEONS& DRAGONSworld.
Before you dive into step 1 below, think about the Record the traits granted by your race on your
kind of adventurer you want to play. Vou might be a character sheet. Be sure to note your starting
courageous fighter, a skulking rogue, a fervent cleric, or languages and your base speed as well.
a flamboyant wizard. Or you might be more interested
in an unconventional character, such as a brawny rogue BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP I
who likes hand-to-hand combat, or a sharpshooter who Bob is sitting down to create his character. He decides
picks of[ enemies from afar. Do you like fantasy fiction that a gruff mountain dwarf fits the character he wants
featuring dwarves or elves? Try building a character of to play. He notes ali the racial traits of dwarves on his
one of those races. Do you want your character to be the character sheet, including his speed of 25 feet and the
toughest adventurer at the table? Consider a class like languages he knows: Common and Dwarvish.
barbarian or paladin.lfyou don't know where else to
begin, take a look at the illustrations in this book to see 2. CHOOSE A CLASS
what catches your interest.
Once you have a character in mind, follow these steps Every adventurer is a member of a class. Class broadly
in order, making decisions that reflect the character you describes a character's vocation, what special talents he
want. Your conception of your character might evolve or she possesses, and the tactics he or she is most likely
with each choice you make. What's important is that you to employ when exploring a dungeon, fighting monsters,
come to the table with a character you're excited to play. or engaging in a tense negotiation. The character
Throughout this chapter, we use the term character classes are described in chapter 3.
sheet to mean whatever you use to track your character,
whether it's a formal character sheet (like the one at the Your character receives a number of benefits from
end of this book), some form of digital record, or a piece your choice of class. Many of these benefits are class
of notebook paper. An official 0&0 character sheet is a features-capabilities (including spellcasting) that set
fine place to start until you know what information you your character apart from members of other classes.
need and how you use it during the game. Vou also gain a number of proficiencies: armor,
weapons, skills, saving throws, and some times tools.
BUILDING BRUENOR Your proficiencies define many of the things your
Each step of character creation includes an example of character can do particularly well, from using certain
that step, with a player named Bob building his dwarf weapons to telling a convincing lie.
character, Bruenor.
On your character sheet, record ali the features that
1. CHOOSE A RACE your class gives you at 1st leveI.

Every character belongs to a race, one of the many LEVEL
intelligent humanoid species in the 0&0 world. The
most common player character races are dwarves, elves, Typically, a character starts at 1st levei and advances
halflings, and humans. Some races also have subraces, in levei by adventuring and gaining experience points
such as mountain dwarf or wood elf. Chapter 2 provides (XP). A 1st-levei character is inexperienced in the
more information about these races, as well as the less adventuring world, although he or she might have been
widespread races of dragonborn, gnomes, half-elves, a soldier or a pirate and done dangerous things before.
half-orcs, and tieflings.
Starting of[ at 1st levei marks your character's entry
The race you choose contributes to your character's into the adventuring life. If you're already familiar
identity in an important way, by establishing a general with the game, or ifyou arejoining an existing 0&0
appearance and the natural talents gained from culture campaign, your DM might decide to have you begin at a
and ancestry. Your character's race grants particular higher levei, on the assumption that your character has
racial traits, such as special senses, proficiency with already survived a few harrowing adventures.
certain weapons or toois, proficiency in one or more
skills, or the ability to use minor spells. These traits 4 •
sometimes dovetail with the capabilities of certain r
QUICK BUILD

Each e1ass description in chapter 3 ineludes a section
offering suggestions to quickly build a character of that
e1ass, ineluding how to assign your highest ability scores,
a background suitable to lhe e1ass, and slarting spells.

~

PART I I STEP BY STEP CHARACTERS 11


Record your levei on your character sheet.lfyou're At 1st levei, your character has 1 Hit Die, and the
starting at a higher levei, record the additional elements die type is determined by your c1ass. Vou start with hit
your c1ass gives you for your leveis past 1sI. Also record points equal to the highest roll of that die, as indicated in
your experience points. A 1st-levei character has O your c1ass description. (You also add your Constitution
XP. A higher-Ievel character typically begins with the modifier, which you'lI determine in step 3.) This is also
minimum amount of XP required to reach that levei your hit poiot maximum.
(see "Beyond 1st Levei" later in this chapter).
Record your character's hit points on your character
HIT POINTS AND HIT DICE sheet. AIso record the type of Hit Die your character
Your character's hit points define how tough your uses and the number of Hit Dice you have. After you
character is in combat and other dangerous situations. rest, you can spend Hit Dice to regain hit points (see
Your hit points are determined by your Hit Dice (short "Resting" in chapter 8).
for Hit Point Dice).
PROFICIENCY BONUS
ABILITY SCORE SUMMARY
The table that appears in your c1ass description shows
Strength your proficiency bonus, which is +2 for a 1st-Ievel
character. Your proficiency bonus applies to many of the
Measures: Natural athletieism, bodily power numbers you'lI be recording on your character sheet:

Important for: Barbarian, fighter, paladin Attack rolls using weapons you're proficient with
Attack rolls with spells you cast
Raciallncreases: Ability checks using skills you're proficient in
Ability checks using tools you're proficient with
Mounta;n dwarf (+2) HaJf-ore (+2) Saving throws you're proficient in
Saving throw DCs for spells you cast (explained in
Dragonborn (+2) Human (+1) each spellcasting c1ass)

Dexterity Your c1ass determines your weapon proficiencies,
your saving throw proficiencies, and some of your skill
Measures: Physieal agility, reflexes, balance, poise and tool proficiencies. (Skills are described in chapter 7,
tools in chapter 5.) Your background gives you additional
Important for: Monk, ranger, rogue skill and toa I proficiencies, and some races give
you more proficiencies. Be sure to note ali of these
Raciallncreases: proficiencies, as well as your proficiency bonus, on your
character sheet.
Elf (+2) Forest gnome (+1)
Your proficiency bonus can't be added to a single die
Halfling (+2) Human (+1) roll ar other number more than once. Occasionally, your
proficiency bonus might be modified (doubled ar halved,
Constitution vital force for example) before you apply it. If a circumstance
Measures: HeaJth, stamina, suggests that your proficiency bonus applies more than
Important for: Everyone Half-ore (+1) once to the same roll ar that it should be multiplied
RaGÍallncreases: Human (+1) more than once, you nevertheless add it only once,
multiply it only once, and halve it only once.
Dwarf (+2)
Stout halfling (+1) BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 2
Roek gnome (+1)
Bob imagines Bruenor charging into battIe with an axe,
Intelligenee one horo on his helmet broken ofr. He makes Bruenor a
fighter and notes the fighter's proficiencies and 1st-leveI
Measures: Mental aeuity, information reeall, analytieal skill c1ass features on his character sheet.

Important for: Wizard As a 1st-leveI fighter, Bruenor has 1 Hit Die-a d 10-

Raciallncreases: and starts with hit points equal to la + his Constitution

High elf (+1) Tiefling (+1) modifier. Bob notes this, and will record the final
number after he determines Bruenor's Constitution
Gnome (+2) Human (+1) score (see step 3). Bob also notes the proficiency bonus
for a 1st-levei character, which is +2.
Wisdom
3. DETERMINE ABILITY SCORES
Measures: Awareness, intuition, insight
Much of what your character does in the game depends
Important for: Clerie, druid on his ar her six abilities: Strength, Dexterity,
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma.
Racial Jncreases: Each ability has a score, which is a number you record
on your character sheet.
Hill dwarf (+1) Human (+1)
The six abilities and their use in the game are
Wood elf (+1) described in chapter 7. The Ability Score Summary

Charisma

Measures: Confidenee, eloquenee, leadership

Importantfor: Bard, soreerer, warloek

Raciallncreases:

Half.elf (+2) Dragonborn (+1)

Drow (+1) Human (+1)

Lightfoot halfling (+1) Tiefling (+2)

PART 1 I STEP-BY-STEP CHARACTERS

12


table provides a quick reference for what qualities ABILITY SCORES ANO MOOIFIERS
are measured by each ability, what races increases
which abilities, and what classes consider each ability Score Modifier Score Modifier
particularly importan!. 1 -5 16-17 +3
-4 18-19 +4
Vou generate your character's six ability scores 2-3 -3 20-21 +5
randomly. Roll four 6-sided dice and record the total of 4-5 -2 22-23 +6
the highest three dice on a piece of scratch paper. Do 6-7 -1 24-25 +7
this five more times, so that you have six numbers. If 8-9 +0 26-27 +8
you want to save time or don't like the ide a of randomly 10-11 +1 28-29 +9
determining ability scores, you can use the following 12-13 +2 +10
scores instead: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10,8. 14-15 30

Now take your six numbers and write each number average and nearly equal (13,13,13,12,12,12), or any
beside one of your character's six abilities to assign set of numbers between those extremes.
scores to Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence,
Wisdom, and Charisma. Afterward, make any changes 4. DESCRIBE YOUR CHARACTER
to your ability scores as a result of your race choice.
Dnce you know the basic game aspects of your
After assigning your ability scores, determine character, it's time to f1esh him or her out as a person.
your ability modifiers using the Ability Scores and Your character needs a name. Spend a few minutes
Modifiers table. To determine an ability modifier without thinking about what he or she looks like and how he or
consulting the table, subtract 10 fram the ability score she behaves in general terms.
and then divide the result by 2 (round down). Write the
modifier next to each of your scores. Using the information in chapter 4, you can f1esh out
your character's physical appearance and personality
BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 3 traits. Choose your character's alignment (the moral
compass that guides his or her decisions) and ideaIs.
Bob decides to use the standard set of scores (15, 14, Chapter 4 also helps you identify the things your
13, 12, 10,8) for Bruenor's abilities. Since he's a fighter, character holds most dear, called bonds, and the ftaws
he puts his highest score, 15, in Strength. His next- that could one day undermine him or her.
highest, 14, goes in Constitution. Bruenor might be a
brash fighter, but Bob decides he wants the dwarf to Your character's background describes where he or
be older, wiser, and a good leader, so he puts decent she carne from, his or her original occupation, and the
scores in Wisdom and Charisma. After applying his character's place in the D&D world. Your DM might
racial benefits (increasing Bruenor's Constitution by offer additional backgrounds beyond the ones included
2 and his Strength by 2), Bruenor's ability scores and
modifiers look like this: Strength 17 (+3), Dexterity 10
(+0), Constitution 16 (+3), Intelligence 8 (-I), Wisdom 13
(+1), Charisma 12 (+1).

Bob fills in Bruenor's final hit points: 10 + his
Constitution modifier of +3, for a total of 13 hit points.

VARIANT: CUSTOMIZING ABILITY SCORES

At your Dungeon Master's option, you can use this
variant for determining your ability scores. The method
described here allows you to build a character with a set
of ability scores you choose individually.

Vou have 27 points to spend on your ability scores.
The cost of each score is shown on the Ability Score
Point Cost table. For example, a score of 14 costs 7
points. Using this method, 15 is the highest ability score
you can end up with, before applying racial increases.
Vou can't have a score lower than 8.

This method of determining ability scores enables
you to create a set of three high numbers and three low
ones (15, 15, 15, 8, 8, 8), a set of numbers that are above

ABILlTY SCORE POI NT COST CosI
Score CosI Score 4
5
8 O 12 7
9 1 13 9
10 2 14
11 3 15

13


in chapter 4, and might be willing to work with you to His flaw is tied to his caring, sensitive nature-he has a
craft a background that's a more precise fit for your soft spot for orphans and wayward souls, leading him to
character concept. show mercy even when it might not be warranted.

A background gives your character a background 5. CHOOSE E UIPMENT
feature (a general benefit) and proficiency in two skills,
and it might also give you additionallanguages or Your elass and background determine your character's
proficiency with certain kinds of tools. Record this starting equipment, ineluding weapons, armor, and
information, along with the personality information other adventuring gear. Record this equipment on your
you develop, on your character sheet. character sheet. Ali such items are detailed in chapter 5.

YOUR CHARACTER'S ABILITIES Instead of taking the gear given to you by your elass
and background, you can purchase your starting
Take your character's ability scores and race into equipment. Vou have a number of gold pieces (gp)
account as you flesh out his or her appearance to spend based on your elass, as shown in chapter 5.
and personality. A very strong character with low Extensive lists of equipment, with prices, also appear in
Intelligence might think and behave very differently that chapter. If you wish, you can also have one trinket
from a very smart character with low Strength. at no cost (see the trinket table at the end of chapter 5).

For example, high Strength usually corresponds Your Strength score limits the amount of gear you can
with a burly or athletic body, while a character with carry. Try not to purchase equipment with a total weight
low Strength might be scrawny or plump. (in pounds) exceeding your Strength score times 15.
Chapter 7 has more information on carrying capacity.
A character with high Dexterity is probably lithe and
slim, while a character with low Dexterity might be ARMOR CLASS
either gangly and awkward or heavy and thick-fingered. Your Armor Class (AC)represents how well your
character avoids being wounded in battle. Things that
A character with high Constitution usually looks contribute to your AC inelude the armor you wear, the
healthy, with bright eyes and abundant energy. A shield you carry, and your Dexterity modifier. Not ali
character with low Constitution might be sickly or frai!. characters wear armor or carry shields, however.

A character with high Intelligence might be highly Without armor or a shield, your character's AC equals
inquisitive and studious, while a character with low 10 + his or her Dexterity modifier. If your character
Intelligence might speak simply or easily forget details. wears armor, carries a shield, or both, calculate your
AC using the rules in chapter 5. Record your AC on
A character with high Wisdom has good judgment, your character sheet.
empathy, and a general awareness of what's going on.
A character with low Wisdom might be absent-minded, Your character needs to be proficient with armor and
foolhardy, or oblivious. shields to wear and use them effectively, and your armor
and shield proficiencies are determined by your elass.
A character with high Charisma exudes confidence, There are drawbacks to wearing armor or carrying a
which is usually mixed with a graceful or intimidating shield if you lack the required proficiency, as explained
presence. A character with a low Charisma might come in chapter 5.
across as abrasive, inarticulate, or tímido
Some spells and elass features give you a different
BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 4 way to calculate your AC. If you have multiple features
Bob fills in some of Bruenor's basic details: his name, that give you different ways to calculate your AC, you
his sex (male), his height and weight, and his alignment choose which one to use.
(Iawful good). His high Strength and Constitution
suggest a healthy, athletic body, and his low Intelligence WEAPONS
suggests a degree of forgetfulness. For each weapon your character wields, calculate the
modifier you use when you attack with the weapon and
Bob decides that Bruenor comes from a noble line, the damage you deal when you hit.
but his elan was expelled from its homeland when
Bruenor was very young. He grew up working as a smith When you make an attack with a weapon, you roll
in the remote villages of Icewind Dale. But Bruenor a d20 and add your proficiency bonus (but only if you
has a heroic destiny-to reelaim his homeland-so are proficient with the weapon) and the appropriate
Bob chooses the folk hero background for his dwarf. ability modifier.
He notes the proficiencies and special feature this
background gives him. For attacks with melee weapons, use your Strength
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon that
Bob has a pretty elear picture of Bruenor's personality has the finesse property, such as a rapier, can use your
in mind, so he skips the personality traits suggested in Dexterity modifier instead.
the folk hero background, noting instead that Bruenor is For attacks with ranged weapons, use your Dexterity
a caring, sensitive dwarf who genuinely loves his friends modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon thal
and allies, but he hides this soft heart behind a gruff, has the thrown property, such as a handaxe, can use
snarling demeanor. He chooses the ideal of fairness your Strength modifier inslead.
from the list in his background, noting that Bruenor
believes that no one is above the law.

Given his history, Bruenor's bond is obvious: he
aspires to someday reelaim Mithral Hall, his homeland,
from the shadow dragon that drove the dwarves out.

'4. PART 1 I STEP-BY-STEP CHARACTERS


BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 5 TIERS OF PLAY
Bob writes down the starting equipment from the
fighter c1ass and the folk hero background. His starting The shading in the Character Advancement (able shows
equipment includes chain mail and a shield, which lhe four tiers of play. The tiers don't have any rules
combine to give Bruenor an Armor Class of 18. associated wilh them; they are a general descriplion of how
the play experience changes as characters gain leveIs.
For Bruenor's weapons, Bob chooses a battleaxe
and two handaxes. His battleaxe is a melee weapon, In lhe first lier (leveIs 1-4), characters are effeclively
so Bruenor uses his Strength modifier for his attacks apprentice adventurers. They are learning lhe features
and damage. His attack bonus is his Strength modifier that define lhem as members of parlicular classes,
(+3) plus his proficiency bonus (+2), for a total of +5. including lhe major choices that flavor their c1ass
The battleaxe deals ld8 slashing damage, and Bruenor features as lhey advance (such as a wizard's Arcane
adds his Strength modifier to the damage when he Tradition or a fighter's Marlial Archetype). The threats
hits, for a total of ld8 + 3 slashing damage. When they face are re!ative!y minor, usually posing a nanger lo
throwing a handaxe, Bruenor has the same attack bonus local farmsleads or villages.
(handaxes, as thrown weapons, use Strength for attacks
and damage), and the weapon deals ld6 + 3 slashing In the second tier (leveIs 5-10), characlers come into
damage when it hits. lheir own. Many spellcaslers gain access to 3rd-Ievel
spells aI lhe start of this tier, crossing a new threshold of
6. COME TOGETHER magical power with spells such as fireball and lightning
bolt. At lhis lier, many weapon-using classes gain the
Most 0&0 characters don't work alone. Each character abilily lOmake mulliple attacks in one round. These
plays a role within a party, a group of adventurers charac(ers have become imporlanl, facing dangers thal
working together for a common purpose. Teamwork lhrealen cities and kingdoms.
and cooperation greatly improve your party's chances
to survive the many perils in lhe worlds of OUNGEONS In the third lier (leveIs 11-16), characlers have
& ORAGONST. aIk to your fellow players and your OM reached a leveI of power that seIs lhem high ahove
lo decide whether your characlers know one another, the ordinary populace and makes them special even
how they mel, and what sorls of quesls lhe group among advenlurers. At 11th leveI, many spellcasters
might undertake. gain access lo 6th-leveI spells, some of which create
effects previously impossible for player characters to
BEYOND 1ST LEVEL achieve. Olher characters gain fealures (hat allow (hem
lo make more attacks or do more impressive things with
As your characler goes on adventures and overcomes those attacks. These mighty adventurers oflen confront
challenges, he or she gains experience, represenled by threals to whole regions and conlinents.
experience poinls. A character who reaches a specified
experience poinl tolal advances in capabilily. This AI lhe fourth tier (leveIs 17-20), characters achieve
advancemenl is called gaining a leveI. the pinnacle of lheir c1ass features, becoming heroic (or
villainous) archetypes in lheir own right. The fate of the
When your characler gains a leveI, his or her c1ass world or even lhe fundamental order of lhe multiverse
often granls addilional features, as delailed in the might hang in the balance during their adventures.
c1ass description. Some of these fealures allow you
lo increase your abilily scores, eilher increasing lwo CHARACTER AOVANCEMENT
scores by I each or increasing one score by 2. You can't
increase an ability score above 20. In addilion, every Experience Po;nts Levei Proficiency Bonus
characler's proficiency bonus increases at certain leveIs. O 1 +2
300 2 +2
Each time you gain a leveI, you gain I additional Hit 900 3 +2
Oie. Roll lhal Hit Oie, add your Conslitulion modifier 2,700 4 +2
to lhe roll, and add the total to your hit point maximum. 6,500 5 +3
Alternatively, you can use lhe fixed value shown in your 14,000 6 +3
c1ass enlry, which is the average resull of lhe die roll 23,000 7 +3
(rounded up). 34.000 8 +3
48,000 9 +4
When your Conslilution modifier increases by I, your 64,000 10 +4
hit poinl maximum increases by I for each leve! you have 85,000 11 +4
allained. For exampIe, when Bruenor reaches 81h leveI 100,000 12 +4
as a fighter, he increases his Conslilution score from 17 120,000 13 +5
to 18, lhus increasing his Conslilulion modifier from +3 140,000 14 +5
to +4. His hil point maximum lhen increases by 8. 165,000 15 +5
195,000 16 +5
The Character Advancement lable summarizes the 225,000 17 +6
XP you need to advance in leveIs from leveI 1 lhrough 265,000 18 +6
leveI 20, and lhe proficiency bonus for a characler of thal 305,000 19 +6
leveI. Consull the informalion in your character's c1ass 355,000 20 +6
description to see what olher improvements you gain
at each leveI.

PART 1 STEP-BY-STEP {;HARA(TERS

'5


CHAPTER 2: RACES

" RACIAL TRAITS

VISITTOONEOfTHE GREATCITIESINTHE The descriplion of each race includes racial traits lhal
worlds of OUNGEONS& ORAGONS- are common to members of lhal race. The following
Walerdeep, the Free Cily of Greyhawk, or entries appear among lhe lrails of most races.
even uncanny Sigil, the City of Ooors-
overwhelms lhe senses. Voices chatter in

counlless differenl languages. The smells ABILITY SCORE INCREASE
Every race increases one or more of a characler's
I of cooking in dozens of differenl cuisines abilily scores.
mingle with lhe odors of crowded slreels and poor

sanitalion. Buildings in myriad architeclural styles

display lhe diverse origins of their inhabilants. AGE
And lhe people lhemselves-people of varying size,
The age entry noles the age when a member of lhe race
shape, and coloro dressed in a dazzling speclrum is considered an adult, as well as the race's expected
of slyles and hues-represenl many differenl races, lifespan. This informalion can help you decide how
from diminulive halflings and stoul dwarves to old your characler is at lhe start of lhe game. Vou
majeslically beauliful elves, mingling among a variety can choose any age for your characler, which could
of human ethnicities. provide an explanation for some of your ability scores.
For example, if you play a young or very old character,
Scattered among lhe members of these more common your age could explain a particularly low Strength or
races are the lrue exolics: a hulking dragonborn here, Conslitulion score, while advanced age could accounl
pushing his way lhrough lhe crowd, and a sly liefling for a high Inlelligence or Wisdom.
there, lurking in lhe shadows with mischief in her eyes.
A group of gnomes laughs as one of lhem activales a

clever wooden loy lhal moves of ils own accord. Half- ALIGNMENT
elves and half-orcs live and work alongside humans,
without fully belonging to lhe races of eilher of lheir Mosl races have tendencies loward cerlain alignments,
parenls. And lhere, well oul of lhe sunlighl, is a lone described in this entry. These are nol binding for player
drow-a fugilive from lhe sublerranean expanse of characlers, bul considering why your dwarf is chaolic.
the Underdark, trying to make his way in a world for example, in defiance of lawful dwarf society can help
thal fears his kind. you better define your characler,

SIZE

CHOOSING A RACE Characlers of mosl races are Medium, a size calegory
including creatures lhal are roughly 4 lo 8 feet la 11.
Humans are lhe most common people in lhe worlds of Members of a few races are Small (belween 2 and 4 feel
0&0, bul they live and work alongside dwarves, elves, la 11),which means lhal cerlain rules of lhe game affecl
halflings, and counlless olher fanlaslic species. Your lhem differenlly. The mosl importanl of lhese rules
character belongs lo one of lhese peoples. is lhal Small characters have lrouble wielding heavy
weapons, as explained in chapler 6.
Nol every inlelligent race of lhe mulliverse is
appropriale for a player-conlrolled advenlurer. Owarves,

elves, halflings, and humans are the most common SPEED
races to produce the sorl of advenlurers who make up Your speed delermines how far you can move when
lypical parlies. Oragonborn, gnomes, half-elves, half- lraveling (chapler 8) and fighling (chapler 9).
orcs, and lieflings are less common as adventurers.

Orow, a subrace of elves, are also uncommon. LANGUAGES
Your choice of race affects many differenl aspecls of
By virtue of your race, your character can speak, read,
your character. /t establishes fundamenlal qualities thal and wrlte cerlain languages. Chapler 4 lisls the mosl
exisl IhroughoUI your characler's adventuring career. common languages of lhe 0&0 multiverse.
When making lhis decision, keep in mind lhe kind of

character you wanl lO play. For example, a halfling could SUBRACES

be a good choice for a sneaky rogue, a dwarf makes a Some races have subraces. Members of a subrace

lough warrior, and an elf can be a maSler of arcane magic, have lhe lrails of the parenl race in addition lo lhe

Your characler race nol only affecIs your abilily scores lrails specified for lheir subrace. Relationships among

and lrails bul also provides lhe cues for building your subraces vary significantly from race lo race and
characler's story. Each race's descriplion in lhis chapler world to world. In the Oragonlance campaign setting,

includes information to help you roleplay a characler of for example, mountain dwarves and hill dwarves live

lhal race, including personality, physical appearance, logelher as differenl clans of lhe same people, bul in

features of sociely, and racial alignmenl lendencies. the Forgolten Realms, lhey live far aparl in separale

These delails are suggeslions to help you think aboul kingdoms and call lhemselves shield dwarves and

your characler; adventurers can deviate widely from lhe gold dwarves, respeclively.

norm for lheir race. /t's worthwhile to consider why your

character is differenl, as a helpful way to think aboul

your characler's background and personalily.

PARTI I RACES 17


DWARF SHORT AND STOUT

"YER LATE, ELF!" CAME THE ROUGH EDGE OF A FAMILIAR Bold and hardy, dwarves are known as
skilled warriors, miners, and workers
voice. Bruenor Battlehammer walked up the back of his of stone and melaI. Though lhey sland
deadfoe, disregardingthefact that the heavy monster lay well under 5 feel tall, dwarves are so
on top ofhis elvenfriend. In spite ofthe added discamfort, broad and compael lhal lhey can weigh
the dwarf's long, pointed, often-broken nose and gray- as much as a human slanding nearly lwo
streaked though still-fiery red beard came as a welcame feet laller. Their courage and endurance
sight to Drizzt. "Knew I'dfindye in trouble if I came out are also easily a maleh for any of
an' lookedforyel" lhe larger folk.
Owarven skin ranges from deep brown to a paler
-R. A. Salvatore, The Crystal Shard hue linged wilh red, bul lhe most eommon shades are
lighl brown or deep lan, like cerlain lones of earlh.
Kingdoms rich in ancienI grandeur, halls carved into the Their hair, worn long bul in simple slyles, is usually
rools of mountains, lhe echoing of picks and hammers black, gray, or brown, lhough paler dwarves oflen have
in deep mines and blazing forges, a commitmenl 10 red hair. Male dwarves value lheir beards highly and
clan and lradilion, and a burning halred of goblins and groom lhem carefully.
ores-lhese eommon lhreads unile ali dwarves.
LONG MEMORY, LONG GRUDGES

Owarves can live to be more than 400 years old, so lhe
oldesl living dwarves often remember a very differenl
world. For example, some of lhe oldesl dwarves living
in Ciladel Felbarr (in lhe world of lhe Forgotten Realms)
can recall lhe day, more lhan three cenluries ago, when
ores conquered lhe forlress and drove lhem into an exile
lhal lasled over 250 years. This longevity granls lhem a
perspeclive on lhe world lhal shorter-lived races such as
humans and halflings lack.

Owarves are solid and enduring like the mounlains
they love, wealhering lhe passage of cenluries wilh stoic
endurance and little change. They respecl lhe lradilions
of lheir clans, lracing their anceslry back lo lhe
founding of lheir mosl ancienl slrongholds in lhe youth
of lhe world, and don'l abandon those lradilions lighlly.
ParI of lhose traditions is devolion lo lhe gods of lhe
dwarves, who uphold lhe dwarven ideais of induslrious
labor, skill in baltle, and devolion lo lhe forge.

Individual dwarves are determined and loyal, lrue lo
lheir word and decisive in action, somelimes lo lhe poinl
of ~tubbornness. Many dwarves have a strong sense

PART I I RACES
18


of justice, and they are slow to forget wrongs they have SLOW TO TRUST
suffered. A wrong dane to one dwarf is a wrong dane to
the dwarf's entire dan, so what begins as one dwarf's Dwarves gel along passably well wilh mosl olher races. "The
hunt for vengeance can become a full-blown dan feudo difference belween an acquainlance and a friend is aboul a
hundred years," is a dwarf saying lhal mighl be hyperbole,
CLANS AND KINGDOMS bul cerlainly poinls lo how diflicull il can be for a member of
a shorl-lived race Iike humans lo eam a dwarf's lrusl.
Dwarven kingdoms stretch deep beneath the mountains
where the dwarves mine gems and precious metais Elves. "I!'s nol wise lo depend on lhe elves. No lelling whal
and forge items of wonder. They love the beauty and an elf will do nexl; when lhe hammer meels lhe orc's head,
artistry of precious metais and fine jewelry, and in some lhey're as apllo slart singing as lo pull oul a sword. They're
dwarves this lave festers into avarice. Whatever wealth fiighly and frivolous. Two lhings lo be said for lhem, lhough:
they can't find in their mountains, they gain through They don'l have many smilhs, bullhe ones lhey have do very
trade. They dislike boats, so enterprising humans and fine work. And when ores ar goblins come slreaming down
halflings frequently handle trade in dwarven goods oul oflhe mounlains, an elf's good lo have aI your back. Nol
along water routes. Trustworthy members of other races as good as a dwarf, maybe, bul no doubllhey hale lhe ores
are welcome in dwarf settlements, though some areas as much as we do."
are off limits even to them.
Half/ings. "Sure, lhey're pleasanl folk. Sul show me a
The chief unit of dwarven society is the dan, and halfiing hera. An empire, a lriumphanl army. Even a lreasure
dwarves highly value social standing. Even dwarves for lhe ages made by halfiing hands. NOlhing. How can you
who live far from their own kingdoms cherish their dan lake lhem seriously?"
identities and affiliations, recognize related dwarves,
and invoke their ancestors' names in oaths and curses. Humans. "You lake lhe lime lo gel lo know a human, and
To be danless is the worst fate that can befall a dwarf. by lhen lhe human's on her dealhbed. If you're lucky, she's
gol kin-a daughler ar granddaughler, maybe-who's gol
Dwarves in other lands are typically artisans, hands and hearl as good as hers. Tha!'s when you can make
especially weaponsmiths, armorers, and jewelers. Some a human friend. And walch lhem gol They sellheir hearts on
become mercenaries ar bodyguards, highly sought after somelhing, lhey'll gel il, whelher i!'s a dragon's hoard ar an
for their courage and loyalty. empire's lhrone. You have lo admire lhal kind of dedicalion,
even if il gels lhem in lrouble more oflen lhan nol."
GODS, GOLD, AND CLAN
~r
Dwarves who take up the adventuring life might be
motivated bya desire for treasure-for its own sake, for
a specilic purpose, ar even out of an altruistic desire to
help others. Other dwarves are driven by the command
ar inspiration of a deity, a direct calling or simply a
desire to bring glory to one of the dwarf gods. Clan and
ancestry are also important motivators. A dwarf might
seek to restore a dan's lost honor, avenge an ancienl
wrong the dan suffered, ar earn a new place within the
dan after having been exiled. ar a dwarf might search
for the axe wielded bya mighty ancestor, lost on the lield
of battle centuries ago.


DWARF NAMES TooJProficieney. Vou gain proficiency with the
artisan's tools of your choice: smith's tooIs, brewer's
A dwarf's na me is granted by a c1an elder, in accordance supplies, or mason's tools.
with tradition, Every proper dwarven na me has been
used and reused down through the generations, A Stoneeunning. Whenever you make an Intelligence
dwarf's name belongs to the c1an, not to the individual. (History) check related to the origin of stonework, you
A dwarf who misuses or brings shame to a c1an name are considered proficient in the History skill and add
is stripped of the na me and forbidden by law to use any double your proficiency bonus to the check, instead of
dwarven name in its place, your normal proficiency bonus.

Male Names: Adrik, Alberich, Baern, Barendd, Brottor, Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
Bruenor, Oain, Oarrak, Oelg, Eberk, Einkil, Fargrim, and Owarvish. Owarvish is full of hard consonants and
Flint, Gardain, Harbek, Kildrak, Morgran, Orsik, guttural sounds, and those characteristics spill over into
Oskar, Rangrim, Rurik, Taklinn, Thoradin, Thorin, whatever other language a dwarf might speak.
Tordek, Traubon, Travok, Ulfgar, Veit, Vondal
Subraee. Two main subraces of dwarves populate the
Female Names: Amber, Artin, Audhild, Bardryn, worlds of 0&0: hill dwarves and mountain dwarves.
Oagnal, Oiesa, Eldeth, Falkrunn, Finellen, Gunnloda, Choose one of these subraces.
Gurdis, Helja, Hlin, Kathra, Kristryd, lide, Liftrasa,
Mardred, Riswynn, Sannl, Torbera, Torgga, Vistra HILL DWARF
As a hill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition,
Clan Names: Balderk, Battlehammer, Brawnanvil, and remarkable resilience. The gold dwarves of Faenln
Oankil, Fireforge, Frostbeard, Gorunn, Holderhek, in their mighty southern kingdom are hill dwarves, as
Ironfist, Loderr, Lutgehr, Rumnaheim, Strakeln, are the exiled Neidar and the debased Klar of Krynn in
Torunn, Ungart the Oragonlance setting.

DWARF TRAITS Ability Seore Inerease. Your Wisdom score
increases by 1.
Your dwarf character has an assortment of inborn
abilities, part and parcel of dwarven nature. Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum
increases by 1, and it increases by 1 every time you
Ability Seore Inerease. Your Constitution seore gain a leveI.
increases by 2.
MOUNTAIN DWARF
Age. Owarves mature at the same rate as humans, but As a mountain dwarf, you're strong and hardy,
they're considered young until they reach the age of 50, accustomed to a difficult life in rugged terrain. You're
On average, they live about 350 years. probably on the tall side (for a dwarf), and tend toward
lighter coloration, The shield dwarves of northern
Alignment. Most dwarves are lawful, believing firmly Faerun, as well as the ruling Hylar c1an and the noble
in the benefits of a well-ordered society. They tend Oaewar c1an of Oragonlance, are mountain dwarves.
toward good as well, with a strong sense of fair play and
a belief that everyone deserves to share in the benefits of Ability Seore Inerease. Your Strength score
a just order. increases by 2.

Size. Owarves stand between 4 and 5 feet tall and Dwarven Armor Training. Vou have proficiency with
average about 150 pounds. Your size is Medium. light and medium armor.

Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel. Your ••
speed is not reduced by wearing heavy armor. DUERGAR

Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you In cities deep in the Underdark live the duergar, ar gray
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou dwarves. These vicious, stealthy slave traders raid lhe surface
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were world for caplives, lhen sell lheir prey lo lhe olher races of
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou lhe Underdark. They have innale magical abililies lo beco me
can't discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. invisible and lo lemporarily grow lo gianl size.

Dwarven Resilienee. Vou have advantage on saving
throws against poison, and you have resistance against
poison damage (explained in chapter 9).

Dwarven Combat Training. Vou have proficiency
with the battleaxe, handaxe, throwing hammer,
and warhammer.

PART I I RACES

20


ELF females are about the same height, and males are only
marginaIly heavier than females.
"I HAVE NEVER IMAGINED SUCH BEAUTY EXISTED,"
Elves' coloration encompasses the normal human
Goldmoon said soft!)'. The day's march had been difficult. range and also includes skin in shades of copper,
but the reward at the end was beyond their dreams. bronze, and almost bluish-white, hair of green ar blue,
The companions stood on a high cliff over thefabled and eyes like pools of liquid gold ar silver. Elves have no
city of Qualinost. facial and little body hair. They favor elegant c10thing in
bright colors, and they enjoy simple yet lovely jewelry,
Four slender spires rasefrom the city's corners like glisten-
ing spindles, their brilliant white stone marbled with shining A TIMELESS PERSPECTIVE
silver. Graceful arches. swoopingfrom spire to spire, soared
through the air. Crafted by ancient dwarven metalsmiths. Elves can live weIl over 700 years, giving them a broad
they were strongenough to hold the weight of an army,yet perspective on events that might trouble the shorter-
they appeared so delicate that a bird lighting on them might lived races more deeply, They are more often amused
overthraw the balance, These glistening arches were the than excited, and more likely to be curious than
city's on!)' boundaries; there was no wall around Qualinost. greedy. They tend to remain aloof and unfazed by petty
The elven city opened its arms loving!)' to the wilderness. happenstance. When p"rs"ing a goal, however, whether

-Margaret Weis & Tracy Hickman, PART tRACES
Dragons of Autumn Twilight

Elves are a magical people of otherworldly grace, living
in the world but not entirely part of it. They live in
places of ethereal beauty, in the midst of ancient forests
ar in silvery spires glittering with faerie light, where
soft music drifts through the air and gentle fragrances
waft on the breeze. Elves lave nature and magic, art
and artistry, music and poetry, and the good things
of the world.

SLENDER AND GRACEFUL

With their unearthly grace and fine features, elves
appear hauntingly beautiful to humans and members
of many other races. They are slightly shorter than
humans on average, ranging from well under 5 feet
tall to just over 6 feet. They are more slender than
humans, weighing only 100 to 145 pounds. Males and

21


adventuring on a mission or learning a new skill or art, to do so. Some mlght join with rebels fighting against
elves can be focused and relentless. They are slow to oppression, and others might become champions of
make friends and enemies, and even slower to forget moral causes.
them. They reply to petty insults with disdain and to
serious insults with vengeance. ELF NAMES

Like the branches of a young tree, elves are f1exible Elves are considered children until they declare
in the face of danger. They trust in diplomacy and themselves adults, some time after the hundredth
compromise to resolve differences before they escalate birthday, and before this period they are called
to violence. They have been known to retreat from by child names.
intrusions into their woodland homes, confident
that they can simply wait the invaders oul. But when On declaring adulthood, an elf selects an adult name,
the need arises, elves reveal a stern martial side, although those who knew him or her as a youngster
demonstrating skill wilh sword, bow, and strategy. mlght continue to use the child name. Each elf's adult
na me is a uni que creation, though It might reflect
HIDDEN WOODLAND REALMS the names of respected individuaIs or other family
members. Little distinction exists between male
Most elves dwell in small forest villages hidden among names and female names; the groupings here reflect
the trees. Elves hunt game, gather food, and grow only general tendencies. In addition, every elf bears a
vegetables, and their skill and magie allow them to family na me, typieally a comblnation of other Elvish
support themselves without the need for clearing and words. Some elves traveling among humans translate
plowing land. They are talented artisans, crafting finely their family names into Common, but others retain the
worked clothes and art objects. Their contact with Elvish version.
outsiders is usually limited, though a few elves make a
good living by trading crafted items for metais (which Child Names: Ara, Bryn, Del, Eryn, Faen, Innil,
thcy have no interest in mining). Lael, Mella, Naill, Naeris, Phann, Rael, Rinn, Sai,
Syllin, Thia, Vali
Elves encountered outside their own lands are
commonly traveling minstrels, artists, or sages. Human Male Adult Names: Adran, Aelar, Aramil, Arannis,
nobles compete for lhe services of elf instructors to Aust, Beiro, Berrian, Carrie, Enialis, Erdan, Erevan,
teach swordplay or magie to their children. Galinndan, Hadarai, Heian, Himo. Immeral, Ivellios,
Laucian, Mindartis, Paelias, Peren, Quarion, Riardon,
EXPLORATION AND ADVENTURE Rolen, Soveliss, Thamior, Tharivol, Theren, Varis

EI\'es lake up advenluring out of wanderlust. Since
they are so long-lived, they can enjoy centuries of
exploration and discovery. They dislike lhe pace of
human society, whieh is regimenled from day lo day but
constantly changing over deeades, so lhey find careers
that let them travei freely and set their own pace. Elves
also enjoy exercising their martial prowess or gaining
greatcr magical power, and adventuring allo\Vs them

PART I I RACES
22


'.;,.

HAUGHTY BUT GRACIOUS Trance. Elves doo't need to sleep. Ioslead, lhey
meditate deeply, remainiog semicooscious, for 4
Although they can be haughty, elves are generally gracious hours a day. (The Commoo word for such meditatioo
even to those who fali short of their high expectations- is "traoce.") While meditatiog, you cao dream after a
which is most non.elves. 5till, they can find good in just fashioo; such dreams are actually meotal exercises that
have beco me reflexive through years of practice. Afler
about anyone. resliog io lhis way, you gaio lhe same beoefit that a
humao does from 8 hours of sleep.
Dwarves. "Dwarves are dull, c1umsy oafs. But what they
Languages. Vou cao speak, read, and write Common
lack in humor, sophistication, and manners, they make up in aod Elvish. Elvish is fluid, wilh subtle iotonatioos aod
iotricate grammar. Elveo literature is rich aod varied,
valor. And I must admit, their best smiths produce art that aod their soogs aod poems are famous among other
races. Maoy bards learo lheir laoguage so lhey cao add
approaches elven quality." Elvish ballads lo lheir repertoires.

Haljlings. "Halflings are people of simple pleasures, and Subrace. Aocieot divides amoog the elveo people
resulled in lhree maio subraces: high elves, wood elves,
that is not a quality to scorn. lhey're good folk, they care aod dark elves, who are commooly called drow. Choose
ooe of lhese subraces. lo some worlds, these subraces
for each other and tend their gardens, and they have proven are divided slill further (such as lhe suo e1ves and mooo
elves of the Forgotteo Realms), so if you wish, you can
themselves tougher than they seem when the need arises." choose a oarrower subrace.

Humans. "Ali that haste, their ambition and drive to HIGH ELF
As a high elf, you have a keeo mind and a mastery of
accomplish something before their brieflives pass away- at least lhe basics of magic. In many of the worlds
of 0&0, lhere are two kinds of high elves. Ooe lype
human endeavors seem 50 futile sometimes. But then (which includes lhe gray e1ves aod valley elves of
Greyhawk, the Silvaoesti of Oragoolaoce, and lhe
you look at what they have accomplished, and you have to sun elves of lhe Forgotteo Realms) is haughty and
reclusive, believing lhemselves to be superior lo
appreciate their achievements. If only they could slow down ooo-elves and even other elves. The other type
and learn some refinement." (iocludiog the high elves of Greyhawk. the
, Qualinesli of Oragonlance, and the moon elves
~ of the Forgotteo Realms) are more common
and more friendly, and oflen encouolered
Female Adult Names: Adrie, Althaea, Anastrianna, among humans and olhe r races.
Andraste, Antinua, Bethrynna, Birel, Caelynn,
Orusilia, Enna, Felosial, lelenia,jelenneth, Keyleth, The sun elves of Faeruo (also called gold
Leshanna, Lia, Meriele, Mialee, Naivara, Quelenna, elves or sunrise elves) have bronze skin and
Quillathe, Sariel, Shanairra, Shava, Silaqui, hair of copper, black, or golden blood. Thcir
Theirastra, Thia, Vadania, Valanthe, Xanaphia eyes are golden, silver, or black. Moon elves (also
called silver elves or gray elves) are much paler,
Fami1y Names (Common Translations): Amakiir with alabasler skio somelimes tioged wilh blue.
(Gemflower), Amastacia (Starflower), Galanodel They oflen have hair of silver-while, black, or blue,
(Moonwhisper), Holimion (Oiamonddew), IIphelkiir but various shades of blond, brown, and red are
(Gemblossom), Liadon (Silverfrond), Meliamne not uncommon. Their eyes are blue or green and
(Oakenheel), Nailo (Nightbreeze), Siannodel flecked with gold.
(Moonbrook), Xiloscient (Goldpetal)
Ability Score Increase. Your lotelligeoce score
ELF TRAITS iocreases by I.

Your elf character has a variety of natural abilities, the ElfWeapon Training. Vou have proficiency with
result of thousands of years of elven refinemenl. lhe longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow.

Ability Score Increase. Your Oexterity score ,
increases by 2.

Age. AIthough elves reach physical maturity at about
the same age as humans, the elven understanding of
adulthood goes beyood physical growth to eocompass
worldly experience. Ao elf typically c1aims adulthood
aod ao adult name arouod the age of 100 aod cao live
to be 750 years old.

Alignment. Elves love freedom, variety, aod self-
expressioo, so they lean stroogly toward the geotler
aspects of chaos. They value aod protect others'
freedom as well as their owo, aod they are more
often good thao 001. The drow are ao exceptioo; their
exile ioto the Uoderdark has made them vicious aod
daogerous. Orow are more often evil thao oot.

Size. Elves raoge from under 5 to over 6 feet tall aod
have sleoder builds. Your size is Medium.

Speed. Your base walkiog speed is 30 feel.
Darkvision. Accustomed to twilit forests and the oight
sky, you have superior vision io dark aod dim cooditioos.
Vou cao see io dim light withio 60 feet of you as if it
were bright light, aod io darkness as if it were dim lighl.
Vou cao'l discero color io darkoess, ooIy shades of gray.
Keen Senses. Vou have proficieocy io the
Perceptioo skill.
Fey Ancestry. Vou have advaolage 00 saviog throws
agaiost beiog charmed, and magic cao't put you to sleep.

P'\RTl (t-S


Cantrip. Vou know one Canlrip of your choice from DARK ELF (DROW)

lhe wizard spelllisl. Inlelligence is your spellcasling Descended from an earlier subrace of dark-skinned
elves; lhedrow were banished from lhe surface world
abilily for il. ',." for following lhe goddess Lollh down lhe palh lo
evil and corruplion. Now lhey have builllheir own
Extra Language. Vou can speak, read, and wrile one civilizalion in lhe deplhs of lhe Underdark, palterned
afler lhe Way of Lollh. Also called dark elves. lhe drow
exlra language of your choice. have black skin lhal resemb[es polished obsidian and
slark while ar pale yellow hair. They commonly have
WOOD ELF very pale eyes (so pale as lObe mislaken for while) in
shades of lilac, silver, pink, red, and blue. They lend lo
As a wood elf, you have keen senses and inluilion, and be smaller and lhinner lhan mosl elves.
your fleel feel carry you quickly and sleallhily lhrough
your nalive foresls. This calegory includes lhe wild Drow advenlurers are rare, and lhe race does nol exisl
elves (grugach) of Greyhawk and lhe Kagonesli of in ali worlds. Check wilh your Dungeon Masler lo see
Dragonlance, as well as lhe races called wood elves in if you can play a drow characler.
Greyhawk and lhe Forgolten Realms. [n Faenln, wood
elves (also called wild elves. green elves, or foresl elves) Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score
are reclusive and dislrusling of non-elves. increases by 1.

Wood elves' skin lends lo be copperish in hue, Superior Darkvision. Your darkvision has a
somelimes wilh lraces of green. Their hair lends loward radius of 120 feel.
browns and blacks, bul il is occasionally blond or
copper-colored. Their eyes are green, brown, or hazel. SunJight Sensitivity. Vou have disadvanlage on altack
rolls and on Wisdom (Perceplion) checks lhal rely on
Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score sighl when you, lhe largel of your altack, ar whalever
increases by 1. you are trying to perceive is in direcl sunlighl.

ElfWeapon Training. Vou have proficiency wilh lhe Drow Magic. Vou know lhe dancing Jights canlrip.
longsword, shorlsword, shorlbow, and longbow. When you reach 3rd levei, you can casllhe faerie tire
spell once per day. When you reach 51h levei, you can
F1eet ofFoot. Your base walking speed also casl lhe darkness spell once per day. Charisma is
increases lo 35 feel. your spellcasling abilily for lhese spells.

Mask ofthe Wild. Vou can altempllo hide even when Drow Weapon Training. Vou have proficiency with
you are only lighlly obscured by foliage, heavy rain, rapiers, shorlswords, and hand crossbows.
falling snow, misl, and olher nalural phenomena.
4,

THE DARKNEss OF THE DRow

Were il nol for one renowned exceplion, lhe race of drow
would be universally reviled. lo mosl, lhey are a race of
demon-worshiping marauders dwelling in lhe sublerranean
deplhs of lhe Underdark, emerging only on lhe blackesl
nighls lo pillage and slaughler lhe surface dwellers lhey
despi se. lheir sociely is depraved and preoccupied wilh lhe
favor of Lollh, lheir spider-goddess, who sanclions murder
and lhe exlerminalion of enlire families as noble houses
vie for posilion.

Yel one drow, alleasl, broke lhe mold. In lhe world of lhe
Forgotten Realms, Drizzl Do'Urden, ranger of lhe North, has
proven his qualily as a good-hearted defender of lhe weak
and innocent. Rejecling his herilage and adrift in a world lhal
looks upon him wilh lerror and loalhing, Drizzl is a model
for lhose few drow who follow in his foolsleps, lrying lo find
a life apart from lhe evil sociely oflheir Underdark homes.

Drow grow up believing lhal surface-dwelling races are
inferior, worlhless excepl as slaves. Drow who develop a
conscience or find il necessary lo cooperale wilh members of
olher races find il hard lo overcome lhal prejudice, especially
when lhey are 50 often on lhe receiving end of halred.


HALFLING The comforts of home are the goals of most halflings'
lives: a place to settle in peace and quiet, far from
REGIS THE HALFLING, THE ONLY ONE OF HIS KIND FOR marauding monsters and clashing armies; a blazing tire
and a generous meal; fine drink and fine conversation.
hundreds ofmiles in a1lY direction, /ocked hisfmgers be- Though some halflings live out their days in remote .
hind his head and /eaned back against the mos~ b/anket agricultural communities, others form nomadic bands
of the tree trunk. Regis was short, even by the standards that travei constantly, lured by the open road and the
of his diminutive roce, with the fluff of his curfy brawn wide horizon to discover the wonders of new lands and
/ocks barefy cresting the three-foot mark, but his be/fy was peoples. But even these wanderers love peace, food,
ampfy thickened by his love of a good mea/, ar severa/, as hearth, and home, though home might be a wagon
the opportunities presented themse/ves. The crooked stick jostling along an dirt road or a raft floating downriver.
that served as hisfishingpole rase up above him, c/enched
between two ofhis toes, and hungout over the quiet /ake, SMALL ANO PRACTICAL
mirrared perfectfy in the glas~ surface of Maer Dua/don.
The diminutive halflings survive in a world full of larger
-R.A. Salvatore, The Crysta/ Shard creatures by avoiding notice or, barring that, avoiding
offense. Standing about 3 feet tall, they appear re1atively
harmless and so have managed to survive for centuries
in the shadow of empires and on the edges of wars and
political strife. They are inclined to be stout, weighing
between 40 and 45 pounds.

Halflings' skin ranges from tan to pale with a ruddy
cast, and their hair is usually brown or sandy brown
and wavy. They have brown or hazel eyes. Halfling men
often sport long sideburns, but beards are rare among
them and mustaches even more so. They like to wear
simple, comfortable, and practical clothes, favoring
bright colors.

Halfling practicality extends beyond their clothing.
They're concerned with basic needs and simple
pleasures and have little use for ostentation. Even the
wealthiest of halflings keep their treasures locked in a
cellar rather than on display for ali to see. They have
a knack for finding the most straightforward solution
to a problem, and have little patience for dithering.

KINO ANO CURIOUS

Halflings are an affable and cheerful people. They
cherish the bonds of family and friendship as well
as the comforts of hearth and home, harboring few
dreams of gold or glory. Even adventurers among
them usually venture into the world for reasons of

PART I I RACES


AFFABLE AN D POSITIVE

Halflings lry lo gel along wilh everyone else and are loalh lo

make sweeping generalizalions-especially negative ones.

Dwarves. "Dwarves make loyal friends, and you can counl

on lhem lo keep lheir word. Bul would il hurt lhem lo smile

once in a whilel"

Elves. "They're 50 beauliful! Their faces, lheir music, lheir

grace and alI. 11'5 like they slepped oul of a wonderful dream.

Bul lhere's no lelling what's going on behind lheir smiling

community, friendship, wanderlust, ar curiosity. They faces-surely more lhan lhey ever let on."
lave discovering new things, even sim pie things, such
as an exotic food ar an unfamiliar style of c1othing. Humans. "Humans are a 101 like us, really. AI leasl some

Halflings are easily moved to pity and hate to see any of Ih em are. 51ep oul of lhe caslles and keeps, go lalk lo lhe
living thing suffer. They are generous, happily sharing
what they have even in lean times. farmers and herders and you'll find good, solid folk. Nol lhal

BLEND INTO THE CROWD lhere's anylhing wrong wilh lhe barons and soldiers-you

Halflings are adept at fitting into a community of have lo admire lheir conviclion. And by prolecling lheir own
humans, dwarves, ar elves, making themselves valuable
and weJcome. The combination of their inherent stealth lands, lhey prolecl us as well." •••
and their unassuming nature helps halflings to avoid
unwanted attention. ••

Halflings work readily with others, and they are loyal EXPLORING OPPORTUNITIES
to their friends, whether halfling ar otherwise. They can
display remarkable ferocity when their friends, families, Halflings usually seI out on the adventurer's path lo
ar communities are threatened. defend lheir communities, support their friends, or
explore a wide and wonder-filled world. For them,
PASTORAL PLEASANTRIES adventuring is less a career than an opportunity or
sometimes a necessity.
Most halflings live in small, peaceful communities with
large farms and well-kept graves. They rarely build HALFLING NAMES
kingdoms of their own ar even hold much land beyond
their quiet shires. They typically don't recognize any A halfling has a given name, a family name, and possibly
sort of halfling nobility ar royalty, instead looking to a nickname. Family names are often nicknames that
family elders to guide them. Families preserve their stuck so tenaciously they have been passed down
traditional ways despite the rise and fali of empires. through the generations.

Many halflings live among other races, where the Male Names: Alton, Ander, Cade, Corrin, Eldon, Errich,
halflings' hard work and loyal outlook offer them Finnan, Garret, Lindal, Lyle, Merric, Milo, Osborn,
abundant rewards and creature comforts. Some halfling Perrin, Reed, Roscoe, Wellby
communities travei as a way of life, driving wagons ar
guiding boats from place to place and maintaining no Female Names: Andry, Bree, Callie, Cora, Euphemia,
permanent home. jillian, Kithri, Lavinia, Lidda, Merla, Nedda, Paela,
Portia, Seraphina, Shaena, Trym, Vani, Verna

Family Names: Brushgather, Goodbarrel, Greenbottle,
High-hill, Hilltopple, Leagallow, Tealeaf, Thorngage,
Tosscobble, Underbough

PART I I RACES 27


HALFLING TRAITS Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and Halfling. The Halfling language isn't secret, but
Your halfling character has a number of traits in halflings are loath to share it with others. They write
common with ali other halflings. very little, so they don't have a rich body of literature.
Their oral tradition. however, is very strong. Almost ali
AbiJity Score Increase. Your Dexterity score halflings speak Common to converse with the people
increases by 2. in whose lands they dwell or through which they .
are traveling.
Age. A halfling reaches adulthood at the age of
20 and generally lives into the middle of his or her Subrace. The two main kinds of halfling. lightfoot and
second century. stout, are more like closely related families than true
suhraces. Choose one of these subraces.
Alignment. Most halflings are lawful good. As a rule,
they are good-hearted and kind, hate to see others in LIGHTFOOT
pain, and have no tolerance for oppression. They are As a lightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from notice,
also very orderly and traditional, leaning heavily on even using other people as cover. You're inclined to be
the support of their community and the comfort of affable and get along well with others. In the Forgotten
their old ways. Realms, lightfoot halflings have spread the farthest and
thus are the most common variety.
Size. Halflings average about 3 feet tall and weigh
about 40 pounds. Your size is Small. Lightfoots are more prone to wanderlust than other
halflings. and often dwell alongside other races or take
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel. up a nomadic life. In the world of Greyhawk. these
Lucky. When you roll a 1 on an attack roll, ability halflings are called hairfeet or tallfellows.
check, or saving throw, you can reroll the die and must
use the new roll. AbiJity Score Increase. Your Charisma score
Brave. Vou have advantage on saving throws against increases by 1.
being frightened.
Halfling Nimbleness. Vou can move through the Naturally Stealthy. Vou can attempt to hide even
space of any creature that is of a size larger than yours. when you are obscured only by a creature that is at least
one size larger than you.

STOUT
As a stout halfling. you're hardier than average and have
some resistance to poison. Some say that stouts have
dwarven blood. In the Forgotten Realms, these halflings
are called stronghearts. and they're most common
in the south.

AbiJity Score Increase. Your Constitution score
increases by 1.

Stout Resilience. Vou have advantage on saving
throws against poison, and you have resistance
against poison damage.

PART I I RACES


• VARIETY IN ALL THINGS

HUMAN Humans are the most adaptable and ambitious people
among the common races. They have widely varying
THESE WERE THE STORIES OF A RESTLESS PEOPLE WHO tastes, morais, and customs in the many different lands
where they have settled. When they settle, though,
long ago took to the seas and rivers in longboats.jirst to they stay: they build cities to last for the ages, and
pillage and terrorize, then to settle. Yet there was an energy. great kingdoms that can persist for long centuries. An
a love of adventure. that sangfrom every page. Long into individual human might have a relatively short life span,
but a human nation or culture preserves traditions
the night Liriel read. lighting candle after precious candle. with origins far beyond the reach of any single human's
She'd never given much thought to humans. but these memory. They live fully in the present-making them
well suited to the adventuring life-but also plan for the
storiesfascinated her. In theseyellowed pages were tales of future, striving to leave a lasting legacy. Individually and
as a group, humans are adaptable opportunists, and
bold heroes. strange andjierce animais. mighty primitive gods. they stay alert to changing political and social dynamics.
and a magic that was part andfabric ofthat distant land.
PART I I RACES
-Elaine Cunningham. Daughterofthe Drow

In the reckonings of most worlds. humans are the
youngest of the common races. late to arrive on the
world scene and short-lived in comparison to dwarves.
elves. and dragons. Perhaps it is because of their shorter
lives that they strive to achieve as much as they can in
the years they are given. Or maybe they feel they have
something to prove to the elder races. and that's why
they build their mighty empires on the foundation of
conquest and trade. Whatever drives them. humans
are the innovators. the achievers. and the pioneers
of the worlds.

A BROAD SPECTRUM

With their penchant for migration and conquest.
humans are more physically diverse than other common
races. There is no typical humano An individual can
stand from 5 feet to a little over 6 feet tall and weigh
fram 125 to 250 pounds. Human skin shades range
fram nearly black to very pale. and hair colors from
black to blond (curly. kinky. or straight); males might
sport facial hair that is sparse or thick. A lot of humans
have a dash of nonhuman blood. revealing hints of elf.
ore, or other lineages. Humans reach adulthood in their
late teens and rarely live even a single century.


EVERYONE'S SECONO-BEST FRIENOS

Just as readily as they mix with each other, humans mingle parents give their children names from olher languages,
with members of other races. They get along with almost such as Dwarvish or Elvish (pronounced more or less
everyone, though they might not be close to many. Humans correctly), bul mosl parenls give names that are Iinked
serve as ambassadors, diplomats, magistrates, merchants, lo their region's cullure or lo lhe naming lraditions of
and functionaries of ali kinds. their ancestors.

Dwa,ves. "They're stout folk, stalwart friends, and true to The malerial cullure and physical characleristics
their word. Their greed for gold is their downfall, though." of humans can change wildly from region lo region.
In the Forgolten Realms, for example, lhe c101hing,
Elves. "ll's best not to wander into elven woods. They don't archileclure, cuisine, music, and Iilerature are different
like intruders, and you'll as likely be bewitched as peppered in lhe norlhwestern lands of lhe Silver Marches than
with arrows. 5till, if an elf can get past that damned racial in dislanl Turmish or Impillur to the easl-and even
pride and actually treat you like an equal, you can leam a lot more dislinclive in far-off Kara-Tur. Human physical
from them." characleristics, lhough, vary according lOlhe ancient
migrations of lhe earliesl humans, so lhallhe humans
Ha/flings. "ll's hard to beat a meal in a halfling home, as of the Silver Marches have every possible varialion of
long as you don't crack your head on the ceiling-good food coloralion and features.
and good stories in front of a nice, warm fire. Ifhalflings had
a shred of ambition, they might really amount to something." In the Forgotten Realms, nine human elhnic groups
are widely recognized, lhough over a dozen olhers are
~~ found in more localized areas of Faerun. These groups,
and lhe lypical names of lheir members, can be used as
LASTING INSTITUTIONS inspiralion no matter which world your human is in.

Where a single elf or dwarf might take on the CALISHITE
responsibility of guarding a speciallocation or a Shorler and slighler in build than mos I olher humans,
powerful secret, humans found sacred orders and Calishites have dusky brown skin, hair, and eyes.
institutions for such purposes. While dwarf c1ans and They're found primarily in soulhwest Faerun.
halfling elders pass on the ancient traditions to each
new generation, human temples, governments, Iibraries, Calishite Names: (Male) Aseir, Bardeid, Haseid.
and codes of law fix their lradilions in lhe bedrock of Khemed. Mehmen. Sudeiman, Zasheir; (female)
history. Humans dream of immorlality, but (excepl for Alala, Ceidil. Hama, Jasmal, Meilil, Seipora, Yasheira,
lhose few who seek undeath or divine ascension to Zasheida; (surnames) Basha, Dumein,Jassan, Khalid.
escape dealh's c1utches) they achieve il by ensuring that Moslana. Pashar, Rein
they will be remembered when lhey are gone.
CHONDATHAN
Allhough some humans can be xenophobic, in Chondalhans are slender, lawny-skinned folk wilh
generallheir societies are inclusive. Human lands brown hair that ranges from almosl blond lo almost
welcome large numbers of nonhumans compared lo the black. Most are tall and have green or brown eyes,
proporlion of humans who live in nonhuman lands. but lhese trails are hardly universal. Humans of
Chondalhan descenl dominale the centrallands of
EXEMPLARS OF AMBITION Faerun, around the Inner Sea.

Humans who seek advenlure are lhe mosl daring and
ambilious members of a daring and ambilious race.
They seek to earn glory in the eyes of lheir fellows
by amassing power, wealth, and fame. More than
olhe r people, humans champion causes rather lhan
lerritories or groups.

HUMAN NAMES AND ETHNICITIES

Having so much more variely than olher cullures,
humans as a whole have no typical names. Some human

PART t I RACES
3°


Chondathan Names: (Male) Darvin, Dorn, Evendur, SHOU
Gorstag, Grim, Helm, Malark, Morn, Randal,
Stedd; (female) Arveene, Esvele, jhessail, Kerri, The Shou are the most numerous and powerful ethnic
Lureene, Miri, Rowan, Shandri, Tessele; (surnames)
Amblecrown, Buckman, Dundragon, Evenwood, pgroJ in Kara-Tur, far to the east of Faerún. They are
Greycastle, Tallstag
yellowish-bronze in hue, with black hair and dark
DAMARAN eyes. Shou surnames are usually presented before
Found primarily in the northwest of Faerún, Damarans the given name.
are of moderate height and build, with skin hues
ranging from tawny to fair. Their hair is usually brown Shou Names: (Male) An, Chen, Chi, Fai, jiang, Jun,
ar black, and their eye colar varies widely, though brown Lian, Long, Meng, On, Shan, Shui, Wen; (female)
is most common. Bai, Chao,jia, Lei, Mei, Qiao, Shui, Tai; (surnames)
Chien, Huang, Kao, Kung, Lao, Ling, Mei, Pin, Shin,
Damaran Names: (Male) Bar, Fadei, Glar, Grigor, Sum, Tan, Wan
Igan, Ivor, Kosef, MivaI, Orei, Pavel, Sergor; (female)
Alethra, Kara, Katernin, Mara, Natali, Olma, Tana, TETHYRIAN
Zora; (surnames) Bersk, Chernin, Dotsk, Kulenov,
Marsk, Nemetsk, Shemov, Starag Widespread along the entire Sword Coast at the
western edge of Faerún, Tethyrians are of medium build
ILLUSKAN and height, with dusky skin that tends to grow fairer
IIluskans are tall, fair-skinned folk with blue ar steely the farther north they dwell. Their hair and eye colar
gray eyes. Most have raven-black hair, but those who varies widely, but brown hair and blue eyes are the most
inhabit the extreme northwest have blond, red, ar common. Tethyrians primarily use Chondathan names.
light brown hair.
TURAMI
I1Iuskan Names: (Male) Ander, Blath, Bran, Frath, Native to the southern shore of the Inner Sea, the
Geth, Lander, Luth, Malcer, Stor, Taman, Urth; Turami people are generally tall and muscular, with
(female) Amafrey, Betha, Cefrey, Kethra, Mara, Olga, dark mahogany skin, curly black hair, and dark eyes.
Silifrey, Westra; (surnames) Brightwood, Helder.
Hornraven, Lackman, Stormwind. Windrivver Turami Names: (Male) Anton, Diero. Marcon, Pieron,
Rimardo, Romero, Salazar, Umbero; (female) Balama,
MULAN Dona, Faila,jalana, Luisa, Marta, Quara, Selise,
Dominant in the eastern and southeastern shores of Vonda; (surnames) Agosto, Astorio, Calabra, Domine,
the lnner Sea, the Mulan are generally tall, slim, and Falone, Marivaldi, Pisacar, Ramondo
amber-skinned, with eyes of hazel ar brown. Their hair
ranges from black to dark brown, but in the lands where HUMAN TRAITS
the Mulan are most prominent, nobles and many other
Mulan shave of[ ali their hair. It's hard to make generalizations about humans, but
your human character has these traits.
Mulan Names: (Male) Aoth, Bareris, Ehput-Ki,
Kethoth, Mumed, Ramas, So-Kehur, Thazar-De, Ability Score Increase. Your ability scores each
Urhur; (female) Arizima, Chathi, Nephis, Nulara, increase by I.
Murithi, Sefris, Thola, Umara, Zolis; (surnames)
Ankhalab, Anskuld, Fezim, Hahpet, Nathandem, Age. Humans reach adulthood in their late teens and
Sepret, Uuthrakt live less than a century.

RASHEMI AJignment. Humans tend toward no
Most often found east of the Inner Sea and often particular alignment. The best and the worst are
intermingled with the Mulan, Rashemis tend to be short, found among them.
stout, and muscular. They usually have dusky skin, dark
eyes, and thick black hair. Size. Humans vary widely in height and build, from
barely 5 feet to well over 6 feet tall. Regardless of your
Rashemi Names: (Male) Borivik, Faurgar,jandar, position in that range. your size is Medium.
Kanithar, Madislak, Ralmevik, Shaumar, Vladislak;
(female) Fyevarra, Hulmarra, Immith, Imzel, Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 fee!.
Navarra, Shevarra, Tammith, Yuldra; (surnames) Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
Chergoba, Dyernina, Iltazyara, Murnyethara, and one extra language of your choice. Humans typically
Stayanoga, Ulmokina learn the languages of other peoples they deal with,
including obscure dialects. They are fond of sprinkling
their speech with words borrowed from other tongues:
Orc curses, Elvish musical expressions, Dwarvish
military phrases, and so on.

•• ••
VARIANT HUMAN TRAITS

If your eampaign uses the optional feat rules fram ehapter 5,
your Dungeon Master might allow these varianttraits, ali of
whieh replaee the human's Ability Seore Inerease trai!.

Ability Score Increase. Two different ability seores of your
ehoiee inerease by l.

Skills. Vou gain profieieney in one skill ofyour ehoiee.
Feat. Vou gain one feat of your ehoiee.

PART 1 RACES

3'


DRAGONBORN For al/ her life, Farideh had known that reading her

HER FATHER STOOD ON THE FIRST OF THE THREE STAIRS father'sface was a skill she'd beenfortunate to learn. A
human who couldn't spot the shift of her eyes or Havilar's
that led dawnfrom the parta I, unmoving. The scales of his
face had grown paler around the edges, but Clanless Mehen would certain(y see on(y the indifference of a dragon in
stil/ looked as if he could wrestle down a dire bear him-
seif. Hisfamiliar wel/-worn armor was gone, replaced by Clanless Mehen'sface. But the shift of scales, the arch of a
violet-tinted scale armor with bright silvery tracings. There
was a blazon on his arm as wel/, the mark of someforeign ridge, the set of his eyes, the gape of his teeth-her father's
house. The sword at his back was the same, though, the one
he had carried since even before he hadfound the twins left face spoke volumes.
in swaddling at the gates of Arush Vayem.
But every scale of it, this time, seemed complete(y stil/-

the indifference of a dragon, even to Farideh.

-Erin M. Evans, TheAdversary

Born of dragons, as their na me proclaims, the
dragonborn walk proudly through a world that greets
them with fearful incomprehension. Shaped by draconic
gods OI' the dragons themselves, dragonborn originally
hatched from dragon eggs as a unique race, combining
the best attributes of dragons and humanoids. Some
dragonborn are faithful servants to true dragons, others
form the ranks of soldiers in great wars, and still others
find themselves adrift, with no clear calling in life.

PROUD DRAGON KIN

Dragonborn look very much like dragons standing erect
in humanoid form, though they lack wings or atai!. The
first dragonborn had scales of vibrant hues matching
the colors of their dragon kin, but generations of
interbreeding have created a more uniform appearance.
Their small, fine scales are usually brass or bronze
in colar, sometimes ranging to scarlet, rust, gold, ar
copper-green. They are tall and strongly built, often
standing close to 6'h feet tall and weighing 300 pounds
ar more. Their hands and feet are strong, talonlike
claws with three fingers and a thumb on each hand.

The blood of a particular type of dragon runs
very strong through some dragonborn clans. These
dragonborn often boast scales that more closely match
those of their dragon ancestor-bright red, green, blue,
or white, lustrous black, ar gleaming metallic gold,
silver, brass, copper, or bronze.

PART 1 I RACES
32


SELF-SUFFICIENT CLANS UNCOMMON RACES

To any dragonborn. the dan is more important than lhe dragonborn and the rest ofthe raees in this ehapter are
life itself. Dragonborn owe their devotion and respect uneommon. lhey don't exist in every worid of D&D, and
to their dan above ali e1se, even the gods. Each even where they are found. they are less widespread than
dragonborn's conduct reflects on the honor of his or her dwarves. elves. halAings. and humans.
dan, and bringing dishonor to the dan can result in
expulsion and exile. Each dragonborn knows his or her In the cosmopolitan eities ofthe D&D multiverse, most
station and duties within the dan, and honor demands peopie hardly look twiee at members of even the most
maintaining the bounds of that position. exotie raees. But the small towns and villages that dot
the countryside are different. lhe common folk aren't
A continuaI drive for self-improvement reflects the accustomed to seeing members ofthese races, and they
self-sufficiency of the race as a whole. Dragonborn value reaet accordingly.
skill and excellence in ali endeavors. They hate to fai!.
and they push themselves to extreme efforts before they Dragonborn. Irs easy to assume that a dragonborn is a
give up on something. A dragonborn holds mastery of monster, especially ifhis or her scaies betray a ehromatic
a particular skill as a lifetime goal. Members of other heritage. Unless the dragonborn starts breathing fire and
races who share the same commitment find it easy to causing destruction. though, peopie are likely to respond
earn the respect of a dragonborn. with eaution rather than outright fear.

Though ali dragonborn strive to be self-sufficient, Gnome. Gnomes don't look like a threat and ean quickly
they recognize that help is sometimes needed in difficult disarm suspieion with good humor. lhe eommon folk are
situations. But the best source for such heJp is the often eurious about gnomes, likely never having seen one
dan, and when a dan needs help. it turns to another before. but they are rarely hostile or fearful.
dragonborn dan before seeking aid from other races-
or even fram the gods. HalfEIf. Although many people have never seen a haif-elf.
virtually everyone knows they exist. A half.elf stranger's
DRAGONBORN NAMES arrival is followed by gossip behind the half.elf's baek and
stoien glanees aeross the eommon room, rather than any
Dragonborn have personal names given at birth, confrontation ar open curiosity.
but they put their dan names first as a mark Df
honor. A chi!dhood na me or nickname is often used HalfOrc. Irs usually safe to assume that a half.ore is
among dutchmates as a descriptive term or a term belligerent and quiek to anger, so peopie wateh themselves
of endearment. The name might recall an event or around an unfamiliar half-ore. Shopkeepers might
center on a habit. surreptitiously hide valuable or fragile goods when a haif-ore
comes in. and peopie slowly clear out of a tavern, assuming a
Male Names: Arjhan. Balasar. Bharash, Donaar, Ghesh. fight will break out soon.
Heskan, Kriv. Medrash. Mehen. Nadarr. Pandjed,
Patrin, Rhogar, Shamash. Shedinn. Tarhun. Torinn riefling. Haif.ores are greeted with a praetieal caution, but
tieAings are the subjeet of supernatural fear. lhe evil of their
Female Names: Akra. Biri. Daar. Farideh, Harann. heritage is plainly visibie in their features. and as far as most
HaviJar, Jheri, Kava, Korinn. Mishann, NaJa, Perra, people are eoneerned, a tieAing eould very well be a devil
Raiann. Sora. Surina. Thava, Uadjit straight from the Nine Hells. People might make warding
signs as a tieAing approaehes, eross the street to avoid
passing near, or bar shop doors before a tieAing ean enter.

33


••• ••
DRACONIANS
Childhood Names: Climber. Earbender. Leaper. Pious.
Shieldbiter. Zealous In the Dragonlance selling, lhe followers of the evil goddess

Clan Names: Clethtinthiallor. Daardendrian. Delmirev. Takhisis learned a dark ritual that let them corrupt the
Drachedandion. Fenkenkabradon. Kepeshkmolik.
Kerrhylon. Kimbatuul. Linxakasendalor. Myastan. eggs of metallic dragons. producing evil dragonborn called
Nemmonis. Norixius. Ophinshtalajiir. Prexijandilin.
Shestendeliath. Turnuroth. Verthisathurgiesh. Yarjerit draconians. Five types of draconians. corresponding to the

DRAGONBORN TRAITS five types of metallic dragons, fought for Takhisis in the War

Your draconic heritage manifests in a variety of traits ofthe Lance: auraks (gold). baaz (brass), bozak (bronze).
you share with other dragonborn.
kapak (copper). and sivak (silver). In place of their draconic
Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score
increases by 2. and your Charisma score increases by 1. breath weapons, they have unique magical abilities. ••

Age. Young dragonborn grow quickly. They walk •••
hours after hatching. altain the size and development
of a IO-year-old human child by the age of 3. and reach DraconicAncestry. Vou have draconic ancestry.
adulthood by 15. They Iive to be around 80.
Choose one type of dragon from the Draconic Ancestry
AJignment. Dragonborn tend to extremes. making a
conscious choice for one side or the other in the cosmic table. Your breath weapon and damage resistance are
war between good and evil (represented by Bahamut determined by lhe dragon type. as shown in the table.
and Tiamat. respectively). Most dragonborn are good.
but those who side with Tiamat can be terrible villains. Breath Weapon. Vou can use your action to exhale

Size. Dragonborn are taller and heavier than humans. destructive energy. Your draconic ancestry determines
standing well over 6 feet tall and averaging almost 250
pounds. Your size is Medium. the size, shape. and damage type of the exhalation.

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. When you use your breath weapon, each creature in

the area of the exhalation must make a saving throw.

the type of which is determined by your draconic
ancestry. The DC for this saving throw equals 8 +
your Constitution modifier + your proficiency bonus. A

creature takes 2d6 damage on a failed save. and half
as much damage on a successful one. The damage

increases to 3d6 at 6th levei. 4d6 at 11th leveI, and 5d6

at 16th leveI.
After you use your breath weapon, you can't use it

again until you complete a short or long resl.

DRACONIC ANCESTRY Damage Resistance. Vou have resistance to the
damage type associated with your draconic ancestry.
Dragon Damage Type Brealh Weapon
Black Acid 5 by 30 fI. line (Dex. save) Languages. Vou can speak. read, and write Common
Blue Lightning 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Brass Fire 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save) and Draconic. Draconic is thought to be one of the
Lightning 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Bronze Acid 5 by 30 fI. line (Dex. save) oldest languages and is often used in the study of magic.
Fire 15 ft. cone (Dex. save)
Copper 15 ft. cone (Con. save) The language sounds harsh to most other creatures and
Gold Poison 15 fI. cone (Dex. save)
Green 15 fI. cone (Con. save) includes numerous hard consonants and sibilants.
Red Fire 15 fI. cone (Con. save)
Silver Cold
White Cold


GNOME fair hair has a tendency to stick out in every direction,
as if expressing the gnome's insatiable interest in
SKINNY AND FLAXEN-HAIRED, HIS SKIN everything around.

walnut brown and his eyes a startling A gnome's persona!ity is writ large in his or ber
turquoise. Burgell stood half as tall as Aeron an ad to appearance. A male gnome's beard, in contrast to
climb up on a stool to look out the peephole. Like most hab- his wild hair, is kept carefully trimmed but often
itations in Oeble. that particular tenement had been built styled into curious forks or neat points. A gnome's
for humans, and smaller residents coped with the resulting clothing, though usually made in modest earth tones,
awkwardness as best they could. is elaborately decorated with embroidery, embossing,
or gleaming jewels.
But at least the relative largeness ofthe apartment gave
Burgell room to pack in ali his gnome-sized gear. Thefront DELIGHTED DEDICATION
room was his workshop. and it contained a bewildering
miscellany of tools: hammers. chisels. saws. lockpicks, As far as gnomes are concerned, being a!ive is a
tinted lenses.jeweler's loupes. andjars of powdered and wonderful thing, and they squeeze every ounce of
shredded ingredients for casting spells. Afat gray cat. the enjoyment out of their three to tive centuries of !ife.
mage'sfamiliar, lay curled atop a grimoire. Tt opened its Humans might wonder about getting bored over the
eyes. gave Aeron a disdainjulyellow stare. then appeared course of such a long tife, and elves take plenty of time
to go back to sleep. to savor the beauties of the world in their long years, but
gnomes seem to worry that even with ali that time, they
-Richard Lee Byers, The Black Bouquet can't get in enough of the things they want to do and see.

A constant hum of busy activity pervades the warrens Gnomes speak as if they can't get the thoughts
and neighborhoods where gnomes form their close- out of their heads fast enough. Even as they offer
knit communities. Louder sounds punctuate the hum: ideas and opinions on a range of subjects, they still
a crunch of grinding gears here, a minor explosion manage to listen carefully to others, adding the
there, a yelp of surprise or triumph, and especially appropriate exclamations of surprise and appreciation
bursts of laughter. Gnomes take de!ight in !ife, enjoying along the way.
every moment of invention, exploration, investigation,
creation, and play. PART I RACES

VIBRANT EXPRESSION

A gnome's energy and enthusiasm for living shines
through every inch of his or her tiny body. Gnomes
average slightly over 3 feet tall and weigh 40 to 45
pounds. Their tan or brown faces are usually adorned
with broad smiles (beneath their prodigious noses),
and their bright eyes shine with excitement. Their

35


DEEP GNOMES

A third subrace of gnomes, the deep gnomes (or svirfneblin),

live in small communities scattered in the Underdark. Unlike

the duergar and the drow, svirfneblin are as good as their

surface cousins. However, their humor and enthusiasm

are dampened by their oppressive environment, and their

inventive expertise is directed mostly toward stonework. ~

~

Though gnomes love jokes of ali kinds, particularly Male Names: Alston, Alvyn, Boddynock, Brocc, Burgell,
puns and pranks, they're just as dedicaled lo lhe more Dimble, Eldon, Erky, Fonkin, Frug, Gerbo, Gimble,
serious tasks they undertake, Many gnomes are skilled Glim,Jebeddo, Kellen, Namfoodle, Orryn, Roondar,
engineers, alchemists, tinkers, and inventors, They're Seebo, Sindri, Warryn, Wrenn, Zook
willing to make mistakes and laugh at themselves in
lhe process of perfecting what they do, taking bold Female Names: Bimpnollin, Breena, Caramip, Carlin,
(sometimes foolhardy) risks and dreaming large, Donella, Duvamil, ElIa, ElIyjobell, ElIywick, Lilli,
Loopmottin, Lorilla, Mardnab, Nissa, Nyx, Oda, Orla,
BRIGHT BURROWS Roywyn, Shamil, Tana, Waywocket, Zanna

Gnomes make their homes in hilly, wooded lands. They Clan Names: Beren, Daergel, Folkor, Garrick, Nackle,
live underground but get more fresh air than dwarves Murnig, Ningel, Raulnor, Scheppen, Timbers, Turen
do, enjoying the natural, living world on the surface
whenever lhey can, Their homes are well hidden by Nicknames: Aleslosh, Ashhearlh, Badger, Cloak,
bolh elever conslruclion and simple illusions, Welcome Doublelock, Filchbatler, Fnipper, Ku, Nim, Oneshoe,
visitors are quickly ushered inlo lhe bright, warm Pock, Sparklegem, Stumbleduck
burrows, Those who are not welcome are unlikely to
find the burrows in lhe first place, SEEING THE WORLD

Gnomes who setlle in human lands are commonly Curious and impulsive, gnomes might take up
gemcutlers, engineers, sages, or tinkers. Some human adventuring as a way to see the world ar for lhe lave
families relain gnome lutors, ensuring lhat their pupils of exploring. As lovers of gems and other fine ilems,
enjoy a mix of serious learning and delighted enjoyment. some gnomes take to adventuring as a quick, if
A gnome mighl tutor severa I generalions of a single dangerous, path to wealth. Regardless of what spurs
human family over the course of his or her long life. them lo adventure, gnomes who adopt this way of life
eke as much enjoymenl out of it as they do oul of any
GNOME NAMES other activity they undertake, sometimes to lhe great
annoyance of lheir adventuring companions.
Gnomes love names, and most have half a dozen or so.
A gnome's mother, falher, elan elder, aunts, and uneles GNOME TRAITS
each give the gnome a name, and various nicknames
from juSl about everyone else might or might not stick Your gnome character has certain characteristics in
over time. Gnome names are typically variants on the common with ali other gnomes.
names of ancestors or distant relalives, lhough some
are purely new inventions. When dealing with humans Ability Scare lncrease. Your Intelligence score
and others who are "stuffy" aboul names, a gnome increases by 2.
learns to use no more than three names: a personal
name, a elan na me, and a nickname, choosing lhe one in Age. Gnomes mature at lhe same rate humans do, and
each calegory that's the most fun to say. most are expected to settle down into an adult life by
around age 40. They can live 350 to almosl 500 years.

Alignment. Gnomes are most oflen good. Those who
lend toward law are sages, engineers, researchers,
scholars, invesligators, ar inventors. Those who lend
toward chaos are minslrels, lrickslers, wanderers,
ar fandful jewelers. Gnomes are good-hearted, and

PART I I RACES


, UI

4 •

ALWAYS ApPRECIATIVE AbiJity Score Increase. Your Constitution score
increases by 1.
It's rare for a gnome to be hostile ar malicious unless he
Artificer's Lore. Whenever you make an Intelligence
ar she has suffered a grievous injury. Gnomes know that (History) check related to magic items, alchemical
objects, ar technological devices, you can add twice your
most races don't share their sense of humor, but they enjoy proficiency bonus, instead of any proficiency bonus you
normallyappIy.
anyone's company just as they enjoy everything else they set
Tinker. Vou have proficiency with artisan's toois
out to do. ~ (tinker's tools). Using those tools, you can spend 1
hour and 10 gp worth of materiaIs to construct a Tiny
~ c1ockwork device (AC 5, 1 hp). The device ceases
to function after 24 hours (unless you spend 1 hour
even the tricksters among them are more playful repairing it to keep the device functioning), ar when
than vicious. you use your action to dismantle it; at that time, you can
reclaim the materiaIs used to create il. Vou can have up
Size. Gnomes are between 3 and 4 feet tall and to three such devices active at a time.
average about 40 pounds. Your size is Small.
When you create a device, choose one of the
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel. following options:
Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou can Clockwork Toy. This toy is a c1ockwork animal, monster,
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright ar person, such as a frog, mouse, bird, dragon, ar
light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou can't soldier. When placed on the grou nd, the toy moves
discern colar in darkness, only shades of gray. 5 feet across the ground on each of your turns in a
Gnome Cunning. Vou have advantage on ali random direction. lt makes noises as appropriate
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws to the creature it represents.
against magic.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common Fire Starter. The device produces a miniature
and Gnomish. The Gnomish language, which uses the flame, which you can use to light a candle,
Owarvish script, is renowned for its technical treatises torch, ar campfire. Using the device
and its catalogs of knowledge about the natural world. requires your action.
Subrace. Two subraces of gnomes are found among
the worlds of 0&0: forest gnomes and rock gnomes. Music Sox. When opened, this music box
Choose one of these subraces. plays a single song at a moderate volume.
The box stops playing when it
FOREST GNOME reaches the song's end ar
when it is c1osed.
As a forest gnome, you have a natural knack for iIlusion
and inherent quickness and stealth. In the worlds of
0&0, forest gnomes are rare and secretive. They gather
in hidden communities in sylvan forests, using iIlusions
and trickery to conceal themselves from threats ar
to mask their escape should they be detected. Forest
gnomes tend to be friendly with other good-spirited
woodland folk, and they regard elves and good feyas
their most important allies. These gnomes also befriend
small forest animais and rely on them for information
about threats that might prowl their lands.

Ability Score Increase. Your Oexterity score
increases by 1.

Natural I1lusionist. Vou know the minor illusion
cantrip. lntelligence is your spellcasting ability for il.

Speak with Small Beasts. Through sounds and
gestures, you can communicate simple ideas with Small
ar smaller beasts. Forest gnomes love animaIs and often
keep squirrels, badgers, rabbits, moles, woodpeckers,
and other creatures as beloved pets.

ROCK GNOME

As a rock gnome, you have a natural inventiveness and
hardiness beyond that of other gnomes. Most gnomes
in the worlds of 0&0 are rock gnomes, including the
tinker gnomes of the Oragonlance setting.


HALF-ELF "Tanis?" said Flint hesitant/y as the man neared.

FUNT SQUINTED INTO THE SETTING SUN. HE THOUGHT "The same." The newcomer's beardedface split in a wide

he saw theftgure of a man striding up the path. 5tanding, grin. He held open his arms and, before the dwarf could
Flint drew back into the shadow of a tall pine to see better.
The man's walk was marked by an easy grace-an eluish stop him, engulfed Flint in a hug that lifted him off the
grace, Flint would haue said;yet the man's body had lhe
thickness and tight muscles of a human, while thefacial ground. The dwarf clasped his oldfriend closefor a brief
hair was deftnite/y humankind's. Ali the dwarf could see
of the man'sface beneath a green hood was tan skin and a instant, then, rememberinghis digni(y, squirmed andfreed
brownish-red beard. A longbow was slung ouer one shoulder
and a sword hung at his left side. He was dressed in soft himself from lhe half-elf's embrace.
leather, careful/y tooled in the intricate designs the elues
loued. But no elfin the world of Krynn could grow a beard -Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman,
... no elf, but ...
Dragons of Autumn Twilight
PA RT 1 I RACES
Walking in two worlds but truly belonging to neither,
half-elves combine what some say are the best qualities
of their elf and human parents: human curiosity,
inventiveness, and ambition tempered by the refined
senses, love of nature, and artistic tastes of the elves.
Some half-elves Iive among humans, set apart by their
emotional and physical differences, watching friends
and loved ones age while time barely touches them.
Others Iive with the elves, growing restless as they
reach adulthood in the timeless elven realms, while
their peers continue to Iive as children. Many half-elves,
unable to fit into either society, choose Iives of solitary
wandering or join with other misfits and outcasts in
the adventuring life.

OF Two WORLDS

To humans, half-elves look Iike elves, and to elves, they
look humano In height, they're on par with both parents,
though they're neither as slender as elves nor as broad
as humans. They range fram under 5 feet to about 6 feet
ta lI, and from 100 to 180 pounds, with men only slightly
talIer and heavier than women. Half-elf men do have
facial hair, and sometimes grow beards to mask their
elven ancestry. Half-elven coloration and features lie
somewhere between their human and elf parents, and
thus sh'ow a variety even more pronounced than that
found among either race. They tend to have the eyes
of their elven parents.


DIPLOMATS OR WANDERERS EXCELLENT AM BASSADORS

Half-elves have no lands of their own, though they are Many half.elves leam at an early age to get along with
welcome in human cities and somewhat less welcome everyone, defusing hostility and finding common ground.
in elven forests. In large cities in regions where elves As a race, they have elven grace wilhoul elven aloofness and
and humans interact often, half-elves are sometimes human energy wilhout human boorishness. They oflen make
numerous enough to form small communities of their excellenl ambassadors and go.belweens (excepl between
own. They enjoy the company of other half-elves, the elves and humans, since each side suspecls lhe half.elf
onIy people who truIy understand what it is to live offavoring lhe olher).
between these two worlds. crealive expression, demonstrating neither love
of Jeaders nor desire for followers. They chafe at
In most parts of the world. though, haIf-eIves are rules, resenl others' demands, and sometimes prove
uncommon enough that one might live for years unreliable, or at least unpredictable.
without meeting another. Some half-elves prefer to Size. HaIf-eIves are about the same size as humans,
avoid company altogether, wandering the wilds as ranging from 5 to 6 feet taIl. Vour size is Medium.
trappers, foresters, hunters, or adventurers and visiting Speed. Vour base walking speed is 30 feel.
civilization onIy rarely. Like elves, they are driven by Darkvision. Thanks to your elfblood, you have
the wanderIust that comes of their longevity. Others, superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou can
in contrast, throw themselves into the thick of society, see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
putting their charisma and social skilIs to great use light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou can't
in diplomatic roles or as swindlers. discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. Vou have advantage on saving throws
HALF- ELF NAMES against being charmed, and magic can't put you to sleep.
Skill VersatiJity. Vou gain proficiency in two skilIs
Half-elves use either human or elven naming of your choice.
conventions. As if to emphasize that they don't really fit Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common,
in to either society, half-elves raised among humans are EIvish, and one extra language of your choice,
often given elven names, and those raised among elves
often take human names. PART 1 RACES

HALF- ELF TRAITS

Vour half-elf character has some qualities in common
with elves and some that are unique to half-elves.

AbiJity Score Increase. Vour Charisma score
increases by 2, and two other ability scores of your
choice increase by I.

Age. Half-elves mature at the same rate humans
do and reach adulthood around the age of 20. They
live much longer than humans, however, often
exceeding 180 years.

AJignment. Half-elves share the chaotic bent of their
elven heritage. They value both personal freedom and

39


THE WARCHIEF MHURREN ROUSED HIMSELF FROM HIS Whether united under the leadership of a mighty
warloek OI' having fought to a standstill after years
sleeping-furs and his women and pulled a short hauberk of eonfliet, ore and human tribes sometimes form
of heauy steel rings ouer his thick. well-muscled torso. He allianees, joining forces into a larger horde lo lhe terror
usual{y rose before most of his warriors. since he had a of eivilized lands nearby. When lhese allianees are
strong streak of human blood in him. and hefound the sealed by marriages, half-ores are bom. Some half-ores
daylight less bothersome than most of his tribe did. Among rise lo beeome proud ehiefs of ore lribes, lheir human
the Bloody Skulls. a warrior was judged by his strength. his blood giving them an edge over lheir full-blooded ore
jlerceness. and his wits. Human ancestry was no blemish rivaIs. Some venture inlo lhe world lo prove lheir worlh
against a warrior-prauided he was euery bit as strang. among humans and other more civilized raees. Many of
enduring. and bloodthirsty as hisfull-blooded kin. Half- lhese beeome advenlurers, aehieving grealness for lheir
orcs who were weaker than their orc comrades didn't last mighly deeds and nOloriely for their barbarie eustoms
long among the Bloody Skulls OI' any other orc tribefor and savage fury.
that matter. Rut it was often true that a bit of human blood
gave a warrior just the right mix of cunning. ambition, and SCARRED AND STRONG
self-discipline to go far indeed. as Mhurren had. He was
master of a tribe that could muster two thousand spears. Half-ores' grayish pigmenlation, sloping foreheads,
and the strangest chiefin TlJar. juttingjaws, prominenl leelh, and lowering builds make
their orcish herilage plain for ali lo see. Half-ores sland
-Richard Baker. Swordmage belween 6 and 7 feel lall and usually weigh belween
180 and 250 pounds.

Ores regard battle sears as lokens of pride and
ornamenlal sears as lhings of beauly. OlheI' sears,
though, mark an ore 01' half-ore as a formeI' slave 01'
a disgraeed exile. Any half-ore who has lived among
01' near ores has sears, whelher lhey are marks of
humilialion 01' of pride, reeounling their pasl exploils
and injuries. Sueh a half-ore living among humans might
display lhese sears proudly 01' hide them in shame.

THE MARK OF GRUUMSH

The one-eyed god Gruumsh erealed lhe ores, and even
those ores who turn away from his worship ean'l fully
escape his influenee. The same is lrue of haIf-ores.
lhough lheir human blood moderales lhe impaet of lheir
orcish heritage. Some half-ores hear the whispers of
Gruumsh in lheir dreams, ealling lhem lo unleash lhe
rage tha! simmers wilhin lhem. Others feel Gruumsh's

PART I I RACES
4-0


exultation when they join in melee eombat-and either GRUDGING ACCEPTANCE
exult along with him or shiver with fear and loathing.
Half-ores are not evil by nature, but evil does lurk within Eaeh half.ore finds a way to gain aeeeptanee from those who
them, whether they embraee it or rebel against it.
hate ores. Some are reserved, trying not to draw atlention to
Beyond the rage of Gruumsh, half-ores feel emotion
powerfully. Rage doesn't jusl quieken their pulse, it themselves. A few demonstrate piety and good.heartedness
makes their bodies burn. An insult stings tike acid,
and sadness saps their strength. But they laugh loudly as publicly as they ean (whether ar not sueh demonstrations
and heartily, and simple bodily pleasures-feasting,
drinking, wrestling, drumming, and wild dancing-fill are genuine). And some simply try to be so tough that others
their hearls with joy. They tend to be short-tempered
and sometimes sullen, more inclined to aelion than just avoid them.
eontemplation and to fighting than arguing. The mosl
aeeomplished half-ores are lhose with enough self. ••
eontrol to get by in a civilized land.
Abi/ity Score lncrease. Your Strength seore
TRIBES AND SLUMS inereases by 2, and your Constitution score
inereases by I.
Half-ores most often live among ores. Of the other raees,
humans are most tikely to aeeept half.ores, and half. Age. Half-ores mature a tittle faster than humans,
ores almost always live in human lands when not living reaehing adulthood around age 14. They age
among ore lribes. Whether proving themselves among notieeably faster and rarely tive longer than 75 years.
rough barbarian tribes or serabbling to survive in the
slums of larger cities, half-ores gel by on their physieal Alignment. Half-ores inherit a tendeney toward ehaos
might, their enduranee, and lhe sheer determinalion from their ore parents and are not strongly inclincd
lhey inheril from lheir human aneeslry. toward good. Half-ores raised among ores and willillg
to tive out their tives among them are usually evil.
HALF-ORC NAMES
Size. Half-ores are somewhat largcr and bulkier than
Half-ores usually have names appropriate lo the eullure humans, and they range from 5 to well over ti feet tall.
in whieh they were raised. A half-ore who wanls lo fit in Your size is Medium.
among humans mighl trade an ore name for a human
name. Some half-ores wilh human names decide to Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
adopt a guttural ore na me beeause they lhink it makes Darkvision. Thanks to your ore blood. you have
lhem more intimidating. superior vision in dark and dim eOllditions. Vou ean
see in dim tight within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
Male Ore Names: Deneh, Feng, Gell, Henk, Holg, Imsh, tight. and in darkness as if it were dim light. You ean't
Kelh, Krusk, Mhurren, Ront. Shump. Thokk diseern eolor in darkness, only shades of gray.
Menacing. You gain proficieney in the
Female Ore Names: Baggi, Emen, Engong. Kansif. Intimidation skill.
Myev. Neega. Ovak, Ownka, Shaulha, Sulha. Vola, Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to
Volen, Yevelda O hit points but not killed outright. you can drop to I hit
point instead. Vou can't use this feature again unti! you
HALF-ORC TRAITS finish a long resto
Savage Attacks. When you score a criticaI hit with
Your half-ore eharaeter has eertain traits deriving from a melee weapon attack, you can roll one of thc wcapon's
your ore aneestry. damage dice one additional time and add it lo lhe extra
damage of lhe criticaI hit.
Languages. You can speak. read, and
write Common and Ore. Ore is a
harsh. grating language with
hard consonants. It has
no script of its own
but is written in the
Dwarvish script.


TIEFLING that wicked glint in his eyes. "Youfight It, don'tyou? Like

"BUT VOU DO SEE THE WAY PEOPLE LOOK AT VOU, a little wildcat, I wager. Every littlejab and commentjust

devil's child." sharpensyour c1aws."
Those block eyes, cold as a winter storm, were staring
-Erin M. Evans, Brimstone Angels
right into her heart and the sudden seriousness in his
voice jolted her. To be greeted with stares and whispers, to suffer
violence and insult on the street, to see mistrust and
"What is it they say?" he asked. "One's a curiosity, two's fear in every eye: this is the lot of the tiefling. And to
a conspiracy-" twist the knife, tieflings know that this is because a
pact struck generations ago infused the essence of
"Three's a curse," shefinished. "You think I haven't heard Asmodeus-overlord of the Nine Hells-into their
that rubbish before?" bloodline. Their appearance and their nature are not
their fault but the result of an ancient sin, for which
"I knowyou have." When sheglared at him, he added, they and their children and their children's children
"[t's not as if l'm plumbing the depths ofyour mind, dear will always be held accountable.
girl. That is the burden of every tiefling. Some break under
it, some make it the millstone around their neck, some INFERNAL BLOODLINE
revel in it." He tilted his head again, scrutinizingher, with
Tieflings are derived fram human bloodlines, and in the
broadest possible sense, they stilllook humano However,
their infernal heritage has left a elear imprint on their
appearance. Tieflings have large horns that take any
of a variety of shapes: some have curling horns like a
ram, others have straight and tall horns like a gazelle's,
and some spiral upward like an antelopes' horns. They
have thick tails, four to tive feet long, which lash or coil
around their legs when they get upset or nervous. Their
canine teeth are sharply pointed, and their eyes are
solid colors-black, red, white, silver, or gold-with no
visible selera or pupil. Their skin tones cover the full
range of human coloration, but also inelude various
shades of red. Their hair, cascading down from behind
their horns, is usually dark, from black or brown to dark
red, blue, or purple.

SELF- RELIANT AND SUSPICIOUS

Tieflings subsist in small minorities found mostly in
human cities or towns, often in the roughest quarters
of those places, where they grow up to be swindlers,

PART 1 I RACES
42


thieves, or crime lords, Sometimes they live among MUTUAL MISTRUST
other minority populations in enclaves where they are
treated with more respect. Peopletend to be suspicious of tieflings. assuming that
their infernalheritage has left its mark on their personality
Lacking a homeland, tieftings know that they have and morality.not just their appearance. Shopkeepers keep
to make their own way in the world and that they have a close eye on their goods when lieflingsenler lheir stores.
to be strong to survive, They are not quick to trust the lown walch mighl followa lieflingaround for a while.
anyone who claims to be a friend. but when a tiefling's and demagogues blame lieflings for slrange happenings.
companions demonstrate that they trust him or her, The realily.lhough. is lhal a liefling's bloodlinedoesn'l affecl
the tiefting learns to extend the same trust to them, his or her personalilylo any greal degree. Yearsof dealing
And once a tiefting gives someone loyalty, the tiefting wilh mislrusl does leaveils mark on mosllieflings. and lhey
is a firm friend or ally for life, respond lo il in differenlways.Some choose lo Iiveup lo lhe
wickedslereolype. bul olhers are virluous. Mosl are simply
TIEFLING NAMES veryaware ofhow people respond lo lhem. Aflerdealing wilh
lhis mislrusllhroughoul youlh. a lieflingoflen develops lhe
Tiefting names fali into three broad categories. Tieftings abililylo overcome prejudicelhrough charm or inlimidalion.
born into another culture typically have names reftective ~~
of that culture. Some have names derived from the
Infernallanguage, passed down through generations, TIEFLING TRAITS
that reftect their fiendish heritage. And some younger
tieftings. striving to find a place in the world, adopt a Tieflings share cerlain racial traits as a result of their
na me that signifies a virtue or other concept and then infernal descent.
try to embody that concept. For some. the chosen na me
is a noble quest. For others. it's a grim destiny. AbiJity Seore Inerease. Your lntelligence score
increases by 1, and your Charisma score increases by 2.
Male Infernal Names: Akmenos, Amnon, Barakas,
Damakos, Ekemon, lados, Kairon. Leucis, Melech. Age. Tieflings mature at the same rate as humans but
Mordai, Morthos. Pelaios, Skamos. Therai live a few years longer.

Female Infernal Names: Akta, Anakis, Bryseis, Criella. Alignment. Tieftings might not have an innate
Damaia. Ea. Kallista. Lerissa. Makaria. Nemeia, tendency toward evil. but many of them end up there.
Orianna. Phelaia. Rieta Evil or noto an independent nature inclines many
tieflings toward a chaotic alignment.
"Virtue" Names: Art. Carrion, Chant, Creed, Despair,
Excellence, Fear, Glory, Hope, Ideal. Music. Nowhere. Size. Tieftings are about the same size and build as
Open, Poetry, Quest. Random. Reverence, Sorrow. humans. Your size is Medium.
Temerily, Torment, Weary
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks lOyour infernal heritage, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You
can see in dim Iight within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright 1ight. and in darkness as if it were dim light. You
can't discern color in darkness. only shades of gray.
Hellish Resistance. You have resistance
to fire damage.
Infernal Legaey. You know the thaumatuqJy cantrip.
Once you reach 3rd levei, you can cast the hellish
rebuke spell once per day as a 2nd-levei spell. Once you
reach 5th levei, you can also cast the darkness spell
once per day. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for
these spclls.
Languages. You can speak. read. and write Common
and Infernal.


CHAPTER 3: CLASSES

OVENTURERS ARE EXTRAOROINARY PEOPLE, Your class gives you a variety of special features, such
as a fighter's mastery of weapons and armor, and a
driven bya thirst for excitement into a wizard's spells. At low leveis, your class gives you only
tife that others would never dare lead, two or three features, but as you advance in levei you
They are herocs, compelled to explore the gain more and your existing features often improve.
dark places of lhe world and take on lhe Each class enlry in this chapter includes a table
challenges lhat lesser women and men summarizing the benefits you gaio at every levei, and
can't stand against. a detailed explanalion of each one.
Class is the primary dcfinition of what your character
can do, !t's more than a profession; it's your character's Adventurers sometimes advance in more thao one
calling. Class shapes the way you think about the class. A rogue might switch direction in tife and swear
world and intcract with it and your relationship with the oath of a paladin, A barbarian might discover latent
other people and powers in the multiverse. A fighler, magical abilily and dabble in the sorcerer class while
for example, might view the world in pragmatic terms continuing to advance as a barbarian. Elves are known
of strategy and maneuvering, and see herself as just a to combine martial mastery with magical training
pawn in a much larger game. A cleric, by contrast, might and advance as fighters and wizards simultaneously.
see himself as a willing servanl in a god's unfolding plan Oplional rules for combining classes in this way, called
or a conflict brewing among various deities. While the multiclassing, appear in chapter 6.
fighter has contacts in a mercenary company or army,
the cleric might know a number of priests, paladins, and Twelve classes-tisted in the Classes table-are found
devotees who share his faith. in almost every D&D world and define lhe spectrum of
lypical adventurers.

1°'éFL:;;:A:S:SE:S==============================:::;=~"

elass Descriplion Hil Primary Saving Throw Armor and Weapon
Die Abilily Proficiencies Proficiencies
5trenglh & Light and medium armor, shields,
Barbarian A fierce warrior of primilive background d12 51renglh Conslitulion simple and marlial weapons
Dexlerily & Lighl armor, simple weapons, hand
who can enter a battle rage Charisma crossbows, longswords, rapiers,
shortswords
Bard An inspiring magician whose power d8 Charisma Wisdom & Lighl and medium armor, shields,
Charisma simple weapons
echoes the music of crealion Inlelligence Lighl and medium armor (nonmelal),
& Wisdom shields (nonmet.;I), clubs, daggers,
Cleric A priestly champion who wields divine d8 Wisdom darls, javelins, maces, quarlerslaffs,
Druid magic in service of a higher power d8 Wisdom 5trenglh & scimilars, sickles, slings, spears
A priest of the Old Faith, wielding lhe Conslilulion Ali armor, shields, simple and marlial
Fighter powers of nalure-moonlight and dlO 51renglh or 5trenglh & weapons
Monk planl growlh, fire and lighlning-and d8 Dexterity Dexlerily 5imple weapons, shorlswords
Paladin adopling animal forms dlO Dexterity &
Ranger A masler of marlial combal, skilled wilh Wisdom Wisdom& Ali armor, shields, simple and marlial
Rogue a variely of weapons and armor 51renglh & Charisma weapons
Sorcerer An masler of marlial arls, harnessing Charisma 51renglh & Lighl and medium armor, shields,
Warlock lhe power of lhe body in pursuil of Dexlerity & Dexlerity simple and marlial weapons
physical and spirilual perfeclion Wisdom
A holy warrior bound lo a sacred oalh Dexlerily

A warrior who uses marlial prowess and dlO Charisma Dexlerily & Light armor, sim pie weapons, hand
nalure magic lo combal Ihreals on lhe Charisma Intelligence crossbows, longswords, rapiers,
edges of civilizalion d8 Intelligence shorlswords
A scoundrel who uses sleallh and Conslilulion Daggers, darls, slings, quarlerstaffs,
Irickery to overcome obslacles and d6 & Charisma lighl crossbows
enemies d8 Wisdom& Lighl armor, simple weapons
A spellcasler who draws on inherenl d6 Charisma
magic from a gifl or bloodline Intelligence Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs,
A wielder of magic Ihal is derived from &Wisdom light crossbows
a bargain wilh an eXlraplanar enlily
A scholarly magic-user capable of
manipulaling lhe slruclures of realily

~5


BARBARIAN

A tall human tribesman strides through a blizzard,
draped in fur and hefting his axe. He laughs as he
charges toward the frost giant who dared poach his
people's elk herdo

A half-orc snarls at the latest challenger to her
authority over their savage tribe, ready to break his neck
with her bare hands as she did to the last six rivaIs.

Frothing at the mouth, a dwarf slams his helmet into
the face of his drow foe, then turns to drive his armored
elbow into the gut of another.

These barbarians, different as they might be, are
defined by their rage: unbridled, unquenchable, and
unthinking fury. More than a mere emotion, their anger
is the ferocity of a cornered predator, the unrelenting
assault of a storm, the churning turmoil of the sea.

For some, their rage springs from a communion
with fierce animal spirits. Others draw from a roiling
reservoir of anger at a world full of pain. For every
barbarian, rage is a power that fuels not just a battle
frenzy but also uncanny reflexes, resilience, and
feats of strength.

PRIMAL INSTINCT

People of towns and cities take pride in how their
civilized ways set them apart from animaIs, as if
denying one's own nature was a mark of superiority. To
a barbarian, though, civilization is no virtue, but a sign
of weakness. The strong embrace their animal nature-
keen instincts, primaI physicality, and ferocious rage.
Barbarians are uncomfortable when hedged in by walls
and crowds. They thrive in the wilds of their homelands:
the tundra, jungle, or grasslands where their tribes
live and hunt.

Barbarians come alive in the chaos of combat.
They can enter a berserk state where rage takes over,
giving them superhuman strength and resilience. A
barbarian can draw on this reservoir of fury only a few
times without resting, but those few rages are usually
sufficient to defeat whatever threats arise.

A LIFE OF DANGER

Not every member of the tribes deemed "barbarians"
by scions of civilized society has the barbarian c1ass. A
true barbarian among these people is as uncommon as
a skilled fighter in a town. and he or she plays a similar
role as a protector of the people and a leader in times
of war. Life in the wild places of the world is fraught
with peril: rival tribes, deadly weather, and terrifying

PART 1 I CLASSES


TH E BARBARIAN

Levei Proficieney Features Rages Rage
1st Bonus Rage, Unarmored 2 Damage
Defense
+2 Reekless Attaek, 2 +2
Danger Sense
2nd +2 Primai Path 3 +2
Ability Score 3
3rd +2 Improvement +2
4th +2 Extra Attaek, 3 +2
Fast Movement
5th +3 Path feature 4 +2
Ferallnstinet 4
6th +3 Ability Seore 4 +2
7th +3 Improvement +2
8th +3 Brutal Criticai 4 +2
(1 die)
9th +4 Path feature 4 +3
Relentless Rage 4
10th +4 Ability Score 5 +3
11th +4 Improvement +3
12th +4 Brutal Criticai 5 +3
(2 dice)
13th +5 Path feature 5 +3
Persistent Rage 5
14th +5 Ability Seore 5 +3 What led you to take up the adventuring life? Were you
15th +5 Improvement +3 lured to settled lands by the promise of riches? Did you
16th +5 Brutal Criticai 6 +4 join forces with soldiers of those lands to face a shared
(3 dice) threat? Did monsters or an invading horde drive you
17th +6 Indomitable 6 out of your homeland, making you a rootless refugee?
Might Perhaps you were a prisoner of war, brought in chains to
18th +6 Ability Score 6 "civilized" lands and only now able to win your freedom.
Improvement Or you might have been cast out from your people
19th +6 Primai Champion Unlimited because of a crime you committed, a taboo you violated,
or a coup that removed you from a position of authority.
20th +6
QUICK BUILD
monsters. Barbarians charge headlong into that danger Vou can make a barbarian quickly by following these
so that their people don't have to. suggestions. First, put your highest ability score in
Strength, followed by Constitution. Second, choose the
Their courage in the face of danger makes barbarians outlander background.
perfectly suited for adventuring. Wandering is often a
way of life for their native tribes, and the rootless life of CLASS FEATURES
the adventurer is little hardship for a barbarian. Some
barbarians miss the close-knit family structures of the As a barbarian, you gain the following class features.
tribe, but eventually find them replaced by the bonds
formed among the members of their adventuring parties. HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: ld12 per barbarian levei
CREATING A BARBARIAN Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 12 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ld12 (or 7) + your
When creating a barbarian character, think about where
your character comes from and his or her place in the Constitution modifier per barbarian leveI after 1st
world. Talk with your DM about an appropriate origin
for your barbarian. Did you come from a distant land, PROFICIENCIES
making you a stranger in the area of the campaign? Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Or is the campaign set in a rough-and-tumble frontier Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
where barbarians are common? Tools: None

Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
Skills: Choose two from Animal Handling, Athletics,

Intimidation, Nature, Perception, and Survival

PART 1 CL"" I::


EQUIPMENT UNARMORED DEFENSE

You start with the following equipment, in addition to While you are not wearing any armor, your Armor Class
the equipment granted by your background: equals 10 + your Dexterity modifier + your Constitution
modifier. Vou can use a shield and still gain this benefit.
(a) a greataxe or (b) any martial melee weapon
(a) two handaxes or (b) any simple weapon RECKLESS ATTACK
An expiorer's pack and four javelins
Starting at 2nd levei, you can throw aside ali concern
RAGE for defense to attack with fierce desperation. When
you make your first attack on your turn, you can decide
In battle, you fight with primai ferocity. On your turn, to attack recklessly. Doing so gives you advantage on
you can enter a rage as a bonus action. melee weapon attack rolls using Strength during this
turn, but attack rolls against you have advantage until
While raging, you gain the following benefits ifyou your next turno
aren't wearing heavy armor:
DANGER SENSE
Vou have advantage on Strength checks and Strength
saving throws. At 2nd levei, you gain an uncanny sense of when things
When you make a melee weapon attack using nearby aren't as they should be, giving you an edge
Strcngth, you gain a bonus to the damage roll that when you dodge away from danger.
increases as you gain leveis as a barbarian, as shown
in the Rage Damage column of the Barbarian table. Vou have advantage on Dexterity saving throws
You have resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and against effects that you can see, sue h as traps and spells.
slashing damage. To gain this benefit, you can't be blinded, deafened, or
incapacitated.
If you are able to cast spells, you ean't cast them or
concentrate on tbem while raging. PRIMAL PATH

Your rage lasts for 1 minute. lt ends early if you are At 3rd levei. you choose a path that shapes the nature of
knocked unconscious or if your turn ends and you your rage. Choose the Path of the Berserker or the Path
haven't attacked a hostile creature since your last turn of the Totem Warrior, both detailed at the end of the
or taken damage since then. Vou can also end your rage c1ass description. Your choice grants you features at 3rd
on your turn as a bonus action. levei and agaln at 6th, 10th, and 14th leveis.

Once you have raged the number of times shown
for your barbarian leveI in the Rages column of the
Barbarian table, you must finish a long rest before you
can rage again.

PART 1 I CLASSES


ABILITY SCORE IMPRovEMENT barbarians attribute their rage to different sources,
however. For some, it is an internai reservoir where
When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, pain. grief. and anger are forged into a fury hard as
and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score of your steel. Others see it as a spiritual blessing. a gift of
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of a totem animal.
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature. PATH OF THE BERSERKER

EXTRA ATTACK For some barbarians. rage is a means to an end-that
end being violence. The Path of the Berserker is a path
Beginning at 5th levei, you can attack twice, instead of of untrammeled fury, slick with blood. As you enter
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno the berserker's rage. you thrill in the chaos of battle,
heedless of your own health or well-being.
FAST MOVEMENT
FRENZY
Starting at 5th levei, your speed increases by 10 feet Starting when you choose this path at 3rd levei. you
while you aren't wearing heavy armor. can go inlo a frenzy when you rage. lf you do so. for
the duration of your rage you can make a single melee
FERAL INSTINCT weapon attack as a bonus action on each of your turns
after this one. When your rage ends. you suffer one levei
By 7th levei, your instincts are so honed that you have of exhaustion (as described in appendix A).
advantage on initiative rolls.
MINDLESS RAGE
Additionally, if you are surprised at the beginning of Beginning at 6th levei. you can't be charmed or
combat and aren't incapacitated. you can act normally frightened while raging. lf you are charmed or
on your first turn, but only ifyou enler your rage before frightened when you enter your rage. the effect is
doing anything else on that turno suspended for the duration of the rage.

BRUTAL CRITICAL INTIMIDATING PRESENCE
Beginning at 10th levei, you can use your action to
Beginning at 9th levei, you can roll one additional frighten someone with your menacing presence.
weapon damage die when determining the extra When you do so. choose one creature that you can see
damage for a criticai hit with a melee attack. within 30 feet of YOU. lf the creature can see or hear
YOU. it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw (DC
This increases to two additional dice at 13th levei equal to 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Charisma
and three additional dice at 17th leveI. modifier) or be frightened of you until the end of your
next turno On subsequent turns, you can use your action
RELENTLESS RAGE to extend the duration of this effect on the frightened

Starting at 11th levei, your rage can keep you fighting
despite grievous wounds. lf you drop to O hit points
while you're raging and don't die outright, you can make
a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. lfyou succeed. you
drop to 1 hit point inslead.

Each time you use this feature after the first. the DC
increases by 5. When you finish a short or long rest, the
DC resets to 10.

PERSISTENT RAGE

Beginning at 15th levei, your rage is so fierce that
il ends early only ifyou fali unconscious or ifyou
choose to end il.

INDOMITABLE MIGHT

Beginning at 18th levei, if your total for a Strength
check is less than your Strength score, you can use that
score in place of the total.

PRIMAL CHAMPION

At 20th levei. you embody the power of the wilds. Vour
Strength and Constitution scores increase by 4. Vour
maximum for those scores is now 24.

PRIMAL PATHS

Rage burns in every barbarian's heart. a furnace
that drives him or her toward greatness. Different
creature IIntil the end of your next turno This effeet ends Your totem animal might be an animal related to those
if the creatllre ends its turn out of line of sight or more listed here but more appropriate to your homeland.
than 60 feet away from YOU. For example. you could choose a hawk or vulture in
place of an eagle.
If the creature succeeds on its saving throw. you can't
use this feature on that ereature again for 24 hours. Bear. While raging. you have resistance to ali damage
except psychic damage. The spirit of the bear makes you
RETALIATION tough enough to stand up to any punishment.
Starting at 14th levei, when you take damage from
a creature that is within 5 fcet of YOIIy. ou can usc Eagle. While you're raging and aren't wearing
your reaction to make a melee weapon attack against heavy armor. other creatures have disadvantage on
that creature. opportunity attack rolls against YOUa. nd you can use the
Dash action as a bonus action on your turno The spirit
PATH OF THE TOTEM WARRIOR of the eagle makes you into a predator who can weave
through the fray with ease.
The Path of the Totem Warrior is a spiritual journcy, as
the harharian accepts a spirit animal as guide, protcctor, Wolf. While you're raging. your friends have
and inspiration. In battle. your totem spirit fills you advantage on melee attack rolls against any creature
with supernatural might. adding magiral fuel to your within 5 fect ofyou that is hostile to YOUT. he spirit of
barharian rage. lhe wolf makes you a leader of hunters.

Most harharian tribes consider a totem animal to bc ASPECT OF THE BEAST
kin to a particular elan. [n such cases. it is unusual for At 6th leveI. you gain a magical benefit based on the
an individual to have more than one totem animal spirit, totem animal of your choice. You can choose the same
though exceptions exisl. animal you selected at 3rd levei or a different one.

SPIRIT SEEKER Bepr. You gain the might of a bear. Your carrying
Yours is a path that seeks altunement with the natural capacity (including maximum load and maximum lift)
world. giving you a kinship with beasts. At 3rd levei when is doubled, and you have advantage 00 Strength checks
you adopt this path. you gain the ability to east the bcast made to push, pull. lift, or break ohjects.
sense and speak with animaIs spells. but only as rituais,
as deseribcd in ehapter 10. Eagle. You gain the eyesight of an eagle. You can
see up to 1 mile away with no difficulty. able to discern
TOTEM SPIRIT even fine details as though looking at something no
AI 3rd leveI. when you adopt this path, you choose a more than 100 feet away from you. Additionally, dim
totem spirit and gain its feature. Vou must make or light doesn't impose disadvantage on your Wisdom
acquire a physiral totem ohject-an amulet or similar (Perception) checks.
adornment-that incorporates fur or feathers. c1aws.
teeth, or bones of the totem animal. AI your option, you Wolf. You gain the hunting sensibilities of a wolf. You
also gain minar physical altributes that are reminiscent can track other creatures while traveling at a fast pace,
ofyour totem spiril. For example. ifyou have a bear and you can move stealthily while traveling at a normal
totem spirit. yott might be unusually hairy and thick. pace (see ,hapter 8 for rules on travei pace).
skinned, or if your totem is the eagle. your eyes turn
bright yellow. SPIRIT WALKER
At 10th leveI. you can cast the com mune with nature
spell, but only as a ritual. When you do so, a spiritual
version of one of the animais you ehose for Totem Spirit
or Aspect of the Beast appears to you to convey the
information you seek.

TOTEMIC ATTUNEMENT
AI 14th levei, you gain a magical benefit based on a
totem animal ofyour choice. Vou can ehoose the same
animal you selected previously or a different one.

Bear. While you're raging. any creature within 5 feet
of you that's hostile to you has disadvantage on altaek
rolls against targets other than you or another eharaeter
with this feature. An enemy is immune to this effeet if it
can't see or hear you or if it ean't be frightened.

Eagle. While raging. you have a flying speed equal to
your current walking speed. This benefit works only in
short bursts; you fali ifyou end your turn in the air and
nothing else is holding you aloft.

Wolf. While you're raging, you ean use a honus aetion
on your turn to knoek a Large or smaller ereature prone
when you hit it with melee weapon attack.

PART I I CLASSES
5°


BARD

Humming as she traces her fingers over an ancient
monument in a long-forgotten ruin, a half-elf in rugged
leathers finds knowledge springing into her mind,
conjured forth by the magic of her song-knowledge
of the people who constructed the monument and the
mythic saga it depicts.

A stern human warrior bangs his sword rhythmically
against his scale mai!, setting the tempo for his war chant
and exhorting his companions to bravery and heroismo
The magic of his song fortifies and emboldens them.

Laughing as she tunes her cittern, a gnome weaves
her subtle magic over the assembled nobles, ensuring
that her companions' words will be well received.

Whether scholar, skald, ar scoundrel, a bard weaves
magic through words and music to inspire allies,
demoralize foes, manipulate minds, create
illusions, and even heal wounds.

MUSIC AND MAGIC

In the worlds of 0&0, words and music are
not just vibrations of air, but vocalizations with
power ali their own. The bard is a master of song,
speech, and the magic they contain. Bards say
that the multiverse was spoken into existence, that the
words of the gods gave it shape, and that echoes of these
primordial Words of Creation still resound throughout
the cosmos. The music of bards is an attempt to snatch
and harness those echoes, subtly woven into their
spells and powers.

The greatest strength of bards is their sheer
versatility. Many bards prefer to stick to the sidelines
in combat, using their magic to inspire their allies and
hinder their foes fram a distance. But bards are capable
of defending themselves in melee if necessary, using
their magic to bolster their swords and armar. Their
spells lean toward charms and illusions rather than
blatantly destructive spells. They have a wide-ranging
knowledge of many subjects and a natural aptitude
that lets them do almost anything well. Bards become
masters of the talents they set their minds to perfecting,
from musical performance to esoteric knowledge.

LEARNING FROM EXPERIENCE

True bards are not common in the world. Not every
minstrel singing in a tavern ar jester cavorting in a royal
court is a bardo Oiscovering the magic hidden in music
requires hard study and some measure of natural talent
that most traubadours and jongleurs lack. lt can be hard
to spot the difference between these performers and true
bards, though. A bard's life is spent wandering acrass
the land gathering lore, telling stories, and living on the
gratitude of audiences, much like any other entertainer.
But a depth of knowledge, a leveI of musical skill, and a
touch of magic set bards apart fram their fellows.

Only rarely do bards settle in one place for long, and
their natural desire to traveI-to find new tales to tell,
new skills to learn, and new discoveries beyond the
horizon-makes an adventuring career a natural calling.
Every adventure is an opportunity to learn, practice a
variety of skills, enter long-forgotten tombs, discover lost

P~RT I Cl:'\SSES


•

works of magic, decipher old tomes, traveI to strange QUICK BUILD
places, or encounter exotic creatures. Bards love to You can make a bard quickly by
accompany heroes to witness their deeds firsthand. A following these suggestions. First,
bard who can tell an awe-inspiring story from personal Charisma should be your highest
experience earns renown among other bards. Indeed, ability score, followed by Dexterity.
after telling so many stories about heroes accomplishing Second, choose the entertainer
mighty deeds, many bards take these themes to heart background. Third, choose the dancing Jights and
and assume heroic roles themselves. vicious mockery cantrips, along with the following
1st-leveI spells: charm person, detect magic, heaJing
CREATING A BARD word, and thunderwave.

Bards thrive on stories, whether those stories are true CLASS FEATURES
or not. Your character's background and motivations
are not as important as the stories that he or she tells As a bard, you gain the following class features.
about them. Perhaps you had a secure and mundane
childhood. There's no good story to be told about that, HIT POlNTS
so you might paint yourself as an orphan raised by a hag Hit Dice: Id8 per bard levei
in a dismal swamp. ar your childhood might be worthy Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 8 + your Constitution modifier
of a story. Some bards acquire their magical music Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: Id8 (or 5) + your
through extraordinary means, including the inspiration
of fey or other supernatural creatures. Constitution modifier per bard leveI after 1st

Did you serve an apprenticeship, studying under a PROFICIENCIES
mas ter, following the more experienced bard until you Armor: Light armor
were ready to strike out on your own? ar did you attend Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows,
a college where you studied bardic lore and practiced
your musical magic? Perhaps you were a young runaway longswords, rapiers, shortswords
or orphan, befriended by a wandering bard who became Tools: Three musical instruments of your choice
your mentor. ar you might have been a spoiled noble
child tutored by a master. Perhaps you stumbled into the Saving Throws: Dexterity, Charisma
clutches of a hag, making a bargain for a musical gift in Skills: Choose any three
addition to your life and freedom, but at what cost?
EQUlPMENT
You start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:

(a) a rapier, (b) a longsword, or (c) any simple weapon
(a) a diplomat's pack or (b) an entertainer's pack
(a) a lute or (b) any other musical instrument
Leather armor and a dagger

SPELLCASTING

Vou have learned to untangle and reshape the fabric of
reality in harmony with your wishes and musico Your
spells are part of your vast repertoire, magic that you
can tune to different situations. See chapter 10 for the
general rules of spellcasting and chapter li for the
bard spelllist.

CANTRIPS
Vou know two cantrips ofyour choice from the bard
spelllist. Vou learn additional bard cantrips of your
choice at higher leveIs, as shown in the Cantrips Known
column of the Bard table.

PART I I CLASSES
52


Levei Proficiency Features Cantrips Spells -Spell Slots per Spell Level-
1st Bonus Spellcasting, Bardic Inspiration (d6) Known Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
2nd +2 Jaek of Ali Trades, Song of Rest (d6) 2
3rd +2 Bard College, Expertise 2 4 3
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 2 5 42
5th +2 Bardic Inspiration (d8), 2 6 43
+3 Font of Inspiration 3 7 4 32
Countercharm, Bard College feature 3 8
6th +3 433
7th +3 Ability Score Improvement 3 9 4331
8th +3 Song of Rest (d8) 3 10 4332
9th +4 Bardic Inspiration (dl0), Expertise, 3 11 4 3331
10th +4 Magical Secrets 3 12 4 3332
4 14
11th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4 3332
12th +4 Song of Rest (d10) 4 15 4 33 32
13th +5 MagicalSecrets, 4 15 43332
14th +5 Bard College feature 4 16 4 3332
Bardic Inspiration (d12) 4 18
15th +5 Ability Score Improvement 4333211
16th +5 Song of Rest (d12) 4 19 4333211
17th +6 MagicalSecrets 4 19 4333211
18th +6 Ability Score Improvement 4 20 4 333311
19th +6 Superior Inspiration 4 22 4 333321
20th +6 4 22 4 333322
4 22

SPELL SLOTS modifier when setting the saving throw DC for a bard
The Bard table shows how many spell slots you have to spell you cast and when making an attack roll with one.
cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. To cast one of
these spells. you must expend a slot of the spell's levei Spell save DC ~ 8 + your proficiency bonus +
ar higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you your Charisma modifier
finish a long resl.
Spell attack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus +
For example. if you know the 1st-levei spell cure your Charisma modifier
wounds and have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-levei spell slot
available, you ean cast cure wounds using either slol. RITUAL CASTING
Vou can cast any bard spell you know as a ritual if that
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND H IGHER spell has the ritual tag.
Vou know four 1st-levei spells of your choice from the
bard spelllist. SPELLCASTING Focus

The Spells Known column of the Bard table shows Vou can use a musical instrument (found in chapter 5)
when you learn more bard spells of your choice. Each of as a spellcasting focus for your bard spells.
these spells must be of a levei for which you have spell
slots, as shown on the table. For instance, when you BARDIC INSPIRATION
reach 3rd leveI in this c1ass, you can learn one new spell
of 1st ar 2nd leveI. Vou can inspire others through stirring words or musico
To do so, you use a bonus action on your turn to choose
Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass, you one creature other than yourselfwithin 60 feet ofyou
can choose one of the bard spells you know and replace who can hear YOU. That creature gains one Bardic
il wilh anolher spell from the bard spelllist, which also lnspiration die, a d6.
must be of a levei for which you have spell slots.
Once within the next 10 minutes, lhe crealure can roll
SPELLCASTING ABILITY the die and add the number rolled to one ability check,
Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your bard attack roll, ar saving throw it makes. The creature can
spells. Your magic comes from the heart and soul you wait until after it rolls lhe d20 before deciding to use the
pau r into the performance of your music ar oration. Bardic Inspiration die, but must decide hefore the DM
Vou use your Charisma whenever a spell refers to your says whether the roll succeeds ar fails. Once the Bardic
spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your Charisma Inspiration die is rolled. it is losl. A creature can have
only one Bardic Inspiration die at a time.

PARl I I Cl-\SSES 53


Vou can use this feature a number of times equal MAGICAL SECRETS
to your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). Vou
regain any expended uses when you finish a long rest. By 10th leveI, you have plundered magical knowledge
from a wide spectrum of disciplines. Choose two spells
Your Bardic Inspiration die changes when you reach from any class, including this one. A spell you choose
certain leveis in this class. The die becomes a d8 at 5th must be Dfa levei you can cast, as shown on the Bard
levei, a dlO at 10th levei, and a d12 at 15th leveI. table, or a cantrip.

jACK OF ALL TRADES The chosen spells count as bard spells for you and are
included in the number in the Spells Known column Df
Starting at 2nd levei, you can add half your proficiency the Bard table.
bonus, rounded down, to any ability check you make that
doesn't already include your proficiency bonus. Vou learn two additional spells from any class at 14th
leveI and again at 18th leveI.
SONG OF REST
SUPERIOR INSPIRATION
Beginning at 2nd levei, you can use soothing music or
oration to help revitalize your wounded allies during At 20th levei, when you roll initiative and have no uses
a short rest. If you or any friendly creatures who can DfBardic Inspiration left, you regain one use.
hear your performance regain hit points atthe end Df
the short rest, each of those creatures regains an extra BARD COLLEGES
Id6 hit points.
The way Dfa bard is gregarious. Bards seek each
The extra hit points increase when you reach certain other out to swap songs and stories, boast of their
leveis in this class: to ld8 at9th levei, to Idl0 at 13th accomplishments, and share their knowledge. Bards
levei, and to Idl2 at 17th leveI. form loose associations, which they call colleges, to
facilitate their gatherings and preserve their traditions.
BARD COLLEGE
COLLEGE OF LORE
At 3rd levei, you delve into the advanced techniques Df
a bard college Dfyour choice: the College of Lore or the Bards Dfthe College of Lore know something about
College of Valor, both detailed atthe end of the class most things, collecting bits Dfknowledge from sources
description. Your choice grants you features at 3rd levei as diverse as scholarly tomes and peasant tales.
and again at 6th and 14th leveI. Whether singing folk ballads in taverns or elaborate
compositions in royal courts, these bards use their gifts
EXPERTISE to hold audiences spellbound. When the applause dies
down, the audience members might find themselves
At 3rd leveI, choose two of your skill proficiencies. Your questioning everything they held to be true, from their
proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check you faith in the priesthood of the localtemple to their
make that uses either of the chosen proficiencies. loyalty to the king.

At 10th leveI, you can choose another two skill The loyalty Dfthese bards Iies in the pursuit Dfbeauty
proficiencies to gain this benefit. and truth, not in fealty to a monarch or following the
tenets of a deity. A noble who keeps such a bard as a
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT herald or advisor knows that the bard would rather be
honest than politic.
When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score Dfyour The college's members gather in libraries and
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores Df sometimes in actual colleges, complete with classrooms
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability and dormitories, to share their lore with one another.
score above 20 using this feature. They also meet at festivaIs or affairs of state, where they
can expose corruption, unravellies, and poke fun at self-
FONT OF INSPIRATION important figures of authority.

Beginning when you reach 5th leveI, you regain ali of BONUS PROFICIENCIES
your expended uses of Bardic Inspiration when you When you join the College of Lore at 3rd levei, you gain
finish a short or long rest. proficiency with three skills of your choice.

COUNTERCHARM CUTTING WORDS
AIso at 3rd levei, you learn how to use your witto
At 6th levei, you gain the ability to use musica!notes or distract, confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence and
words of power to disrupt mind-influencing effects. As competence of others. When a creatare that you can
ao actioo, you can slaft a perfonnance that lasts until see within 60 feet of you makes an atlack roll, an ability
the end of your nextturn. During that time, you and any check, or a damage roll, you can use your reaction to
friendly creatures within 30 feet of you have advantage expend one Dfyour uses of Bardic Inspiration, rolling
on saving throws against being frightened or charmed. a Bardic Inspiration die and subtracting the number
A creature must be able to hear you to gain this benefit. rolled from the creature's roll. Vou can choose to use
The performance ends early if you are incapacitated or this feature after the creature makes its roll, but before
silellced or if you voluntarily end it (no action required). the DM determines whether the atlack roll or ability

PART I I CLASSES
5+


check succeeds or fails, or befure the creature deals its songs, they inspire others to reach the same heights of
damage. The creature is imlllune if it can't hear you or if accomplishment as the heroes of old.
it's imlllune tu being charmed.
BONUS PROFICIENCIES
ADDITIONAL MAGICAL SECRETS When you join the College of Valor at 3rd levei, you
At 6th leveI, yuu learn twu spells of yuur chuice from any gain proficiency with medium armor, shields, and
class. A spell yuu choose must be of a levei you call cast, martial weapuns.
as shown on the Bard table, or a cantrip. The chosen
spells CUUlltas bard spells for yuu but don't count COMBAT INSPIRATION
against the number of bard spells you know. AIso at 3rd leveI, rou learn to inspire others in battle.
A crcature that has a Bardic lnspiratiun die from you
PEERLESS SKILL can roll that die and add the nUlllber rolled to a weapon
Starting at 14th leveI, when you IlIake an ability check. damage roll it jusl nlade. Altematively. when an attack
you can expend one use of Bardic Inspiration. RolI a roll is made against the ercature, it can use its reaetion
Bardic lllspiration die and add the numbcr rolled to to roll the Bardie Inspiration die and add the numbcr
your ability check. You call choose to do so after rou roll rolled to its AC against that attaek. after seeing the roll
the die for the ability check, but before the DM tells rou but before knowing whelher it hits or misses.
whether yuu succeed ur fai!'
EXTRA ATTACK
COLLEGE OF VALOR Starting at 6th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
onee, whcnever rou take the Atlaek aetion on your tum.
Bards of the Cullege uf Valor are daring skalds whosc
tales keep alive the Illemury uf the great heroes of the BATTLE MAGIC
past, and thereby inspire a new generatioll of heroes. At 14th level, you have rnastered the art of weaving
These bards gather in mead halls or around great spellcasting and weapon use into a single harmonious
bonfires to sing the deeds of the mighty, both past act. When yuu use your action to cast a bard spell, you
and present. They traveI the land to witness great can ll1ake Qne weapon attack as a bonus actiol1.
events firsthand and tu ensure that the melllory of
those events doesn't pass frolO the world. With their

PART 1 C.LASSF.S

55


CLERIC

Arms and eyes upraised toward the sun and a prayer
on his lips, an elf begins to glow with an inner light that
spills out to heal his battle-worn companions.

Chanting a song of glory, a dwarf swings his axe
in wide swaths to cut through the ranks of orcs
arrayed against him, shouting praise to the gods with
every foe's falI.

Calling down a curse upon the forces of undeath, a
human lifts her holy symbol as light pours from it to
drive back the zombies crowding in on her companions.

Clerics are intermediaries between the mortal world
and the distant planes of the gods. As varied as the gods
they serve, clerics strive to embody the handiwork of
their deities. No ordinary priest, a cleric is imbued with
divine magic.

HEALERS AND WARRIORS

Divine magic, as the name suggests, is the power of
the gods, lIowing from them into the world. Clerics are
conduits for that power, manifesting it as miraculous
effects. The gods don't grant this power to everyone who
seeks it, but only to those chosen to fuIfi11a high calling.

Harnessing divine magic doesn't rely on study or
training. A cleric might learn formulaic prayers and
ancient rites, but the ability to cast cleric spells relies on
devotion and an intuitive sense of a deity's wishes.

Clerics combine the helpful magic of healing and
inspiring their allies with spells that harm and hinder
foes. They can provoke awe and dread, lay curses of
plague or poison, and even call down liames from heaven
to consume their enemies. For those evildoers who will
benefit most from a mace to the head, clerics depend on
their combat training to let them wade into melee with
the power of the gods on their side.

DIVINE AGENTS

Not every acolyte or officiant at a tem pIe or shrine is a
cleric. Some priests are called to a simple life of temple
service, carrying out their gods' will through prayer and
sacrifice, not by magic and strength of arms. In some
cities, priesthood amounts to a political office, viewed
as a stepping stone to higher positions of authority and
involving no communion with a god at alI. True clerics
are rare in most hierarchies.

When a cleric takes up an adventuring life, it is usually
because his or her god demands it. Pursuing the goals
of the gods often involves braving dangers beyond the
walls of civilization, smiting evil or seeking holy relics in
ancient tombs. Many clerics are also expected to protect

PART 1 I CLASSES


THE CLERIC

Proficieney Cantrips -Spell Slots per Spell Level-

Levei Bonus Features Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th

1st +2 Spellcasting, Divine Domain 32

2nd +2 Channel Divinity (l/rest), 33

Divine Domain feature

3rd +2 3 42

4th +2 Ability Seore Improvement 4 43

5th +3 Destroy Undead (CR 1/2) 4 432

6th +3 Channel Divinity (2/rest), 4 433

Divine Domain feature

7th +3 4 4331

8th +3 Ability Seore Improvement, Destroy Undead 4 4 3 3 2

(CR 1), Divine Domain feature

9th +4 4 43331

10th +4 Divine Intervention 5 43332

11th +4 Destroy Undead (CR 2) 5 43332

12th +4 Ability Seore Improvement 5 43332

13th +5 5 43332

14th +5 Destroy Undead (CR 3) 5 43332

15th +5 5 43332

16th +5 Ability Seore Improvement 5 43332

17th +6 Destroy Undead (CR 4), 5 43332

Divine Domain feature

18th +6 Channel Divinity (3/rest) 5 4333311

19th +6 Ability Seore Improvement 5 4333321

20th +6 Divine Intervention improvement 5 4333322

their deities' worshipers, which ean mean fighting CLASS FEATURES
rampaging ores, negotiating peaee between warring
nations, or sealing a portal that would allow a demon As a clerie, you gain the following class features.
prinee to enter the world.
HIT POINTS
Most adventuring clerics maintain some eonneetion to Hit Dice: 1d8 per clerie levei
established temples and orders of their faiths. A temple Hit Points at 1st Levei: 8 + your Constitution modifier
might ask for a clerie's aid, or a high priest might be in a Hit Points at Higher Leveis: 1d8 (or 5) + your
position to demand il.
Constitution modifier per clerie levei after 1st
CREATING A CLERIC
PROFICIENCIES
As you ereate a clerie, the most important question to Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
eonsider is whieh deity to serve and what principies you Weapons: Ali simple weapons
want your eharaeter to embody, Appendix B includes Tools: None
Iists of many of the gods of the multiverse, Cheek with
your DM to learn whieh deities are in your eampaign. Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from History, lnsight, Medicine,
Onee you've ehosen a deity, eonsider your cleric's
relationship to that god, Did you enter this servi cc Persuasion, and Religion
willingly? ar did the god ehoose you, impelling you into
service with no regard for your wishes? How do the EQ.UIPMENT
tem pie priests of your faith regard you: as a ehampion Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
or a troublemaker? What are your ultimate goals? Does the equipment granted by your baekground:
your deity have a special task in mind for you? ar are
you striving to prove yourself worthy of a great quest? (a) a mace or (b) a warhammer (if proficient)
(a) seale mai!, (b) leather armor, or (c) eha;n mai! (if
QUICK BUILD proficient)
Vou ean make a cleric quiekly by following these (a) a light erossbow and 20 bolts or (b) any simple
suggestions. First, Wisdom should be your highest weapon
ability seore, followed by Strength or Constitution. (a) a priest's paek or (b) an explorer's paek
Seeond, ehoose the aeolyte baekground. A shield and a holy symbol

Po\RT 1 CL'\ SES 5i


SPELLCASTING Vou can change your list of prepared spells when you
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of cleric spells
As a conduit for divine power, you can cast cleric spells. requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least 1
See chapter 10 for the general rules of spellcasting and minute per spelllevel for each spell on your listo
chapter 11 for the cleric spelllist.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
CANTRIPS Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your cleric spells.
At 1st levei, you know three cantrips of your choice from The power of your spells comes from your devotion to
the cleric spelllist. Vou learn additional cleric cantrips your deity. Vou use your Wisdom whenever a c1eric spell
of your choice at higher leveis, as shown in the Cantrips refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use
Known column of the Cleric table. your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw
DC for a cleric spell you cast and when making an
PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS attack roll with one.
The Cleric table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. To cast one of Spell save De ~ 8 + your proficiency bonus +
these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's levei
or higher. Vou regain all expended spell slots when you your Wisdom modifier
finish a long rest.
Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus +
Vou prepare the list of cleric spells that are available your Wisdom modifier
for you to cast, choosing from the cleric spelllist. When
you do 50, choose a number of cleric spells equal to RITUAL CASTING
your Wisdom modifier + your cleric levei (minimum of Vou can cast a cleric spell as a ritual if that spell has the
one spell). The spells must be of a leveI for which you ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.
have spell slots.
SPELLCASTING Focus
For example, if you are a 3rd-Ievel c1eric, you have four
1st-levei and two 2nd-levei spell slots. With a Wisdom Vou can use a holy symbol (found in chapter 5) as a
of 16, your list of prepared spells can include six spells spellcasting focus for your cleric spells.
of 1st or 2nd levei, in any combination. ]f you prepare
the 1st-levei spell cure wounds, you can cast it using DIVINE DOMAIN
a 1st-levei or 2nd-levei slot. Casting the spell doesn't
remove it from your list of prepared spells. Choose one domain related to your deity: Knowledge,
Life, Light, Nature, Tempest, Trickery, or War. Each
domain is detailed at the end of the class description,
and each one provides examples of gods associated
with it. Your choice grants you domain spells and olher
features when you choose it at 1st leveI. It also grants
you additional ways to use Channel Divinity when you
gain that feature at 2nd levei, and additional benefits at
6th, 8th, and 17th leveis.

DOMAIN SPELLS
Each domain has a list of spells-its domain spells-
that you gain at the c1eric leveis noted in the domain
description. Once you gain a domain spell, you always
have it prepared, and it doesn't count against the
number of spells you can prepare each day.

If you have a domain spell that doesn't appear on the
cleric spelllist, the spell is nonetheless a cleric spell for YOU.

CHANNEL DIVINITY

At 2nd levei, you gain the ability to channel divine
energy directly from your deity, using that energy to fuel
magical effects. Vou start with two such effects: Turn
Undead and an effect determined by your domain. Some
domains grant you additional effects as you advance in
leveis, as noted in the domain description.

When you use your Channel Divinity. you choose
which effect to create. Vou must then finish a short or
long rest to use your Channel Divinity again.

Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws.
When you use such an effect from this class, the DC
equals your c1eric spell save DC.

Beginning at 6th leveI, you can use your Channel
Divinity twice between rests, and beginning at 18th levei,

PART 1 I CLASSES
58


you can use it three times between rests. When you finish domains of Knowledge, Life, and Light. As a cleric, you
a short or long rest, you regain your expended uses. choose one aspect of your deity's portfolio to emphasize,
and you are granted powers related to that domain.
CHANNEL DIVINITY: TURN UNDEAD
As an action, you present your holy symbol and speak a Your choice might correspond to a particular sect
prayer censuring the undead. Each undead that can see dedicated to your deity. Apollo, for example, could be
or hear you within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom worshiped in one region as Phoebus ("radiant") Apollo,
saving throw. If the creature fails its saving throw, it is emphasizing his influence over the Light domain,
turned for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. and in a different place as Apollo Acesius ("healing"),
emphasizing his association with the Life domain.
A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move Alternatively, your choice of domain could simply be a
as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly malter of personal preference, the aspect of the deity
move to a space within 30 feet of you. lt also can't take that appeals to you most.
reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from Each domain's description gives examples of deities
moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can use who have influence over that domain. Gods are included
the Dodge action. from the worlds of the Forgotten Realms, Greyhawk,
Dragonlance, and Eberron campaign seltings, as well as
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT from the Celtic, Greek, Norse, and Egyptian pantheons
of antiquity.
When you reach 4th leveI, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of your KNOWLEDGE DOMAIN
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability The gods of knowledge-including Oghma, Boccob,
score above 20 using this feature. Gilean, Aureon, and Thoth-value learning and
understanding above ali. Some teach that knowledge is
DESTROY UNDEAD to be gathered and shared in libraries and universities,
or promote the practical knowledge of craft and
Starting at 5th leveI, when an undead fails its saving invention. Some deities hoard knowledge and keep its
throw against your Turn Undead feature, the creature is secrets to themselves. And some promise their followers
instantly destroyed if its challenge rating is at or below a that they will gain tremendous power if they unlock the
certain threshold, as shown in the Destroy Undead table. secrets of the multiverse. Followers of these gods study
esoteric lore, collect old tomes, delve into the secret
DESTROY UNDEAD places of the earth, and learn ali they cano Some gods
of knowledge pro mote the practical knowledge of craft
Cleric Levei Destroys Undead ofCR ... and invention, including smith deities like Gond, Reorx,
5th 1/2 or lower Onatar, Moradin, Hephaestus, and Goibhniu.
8th 1 or lower
11th 2 or lower KNOWLEDCE DOMAIN SPELLS
14th 3 or lower
17th 4 or lower Cleric Levei Spells

DIVINE INTERVENTION 1st command, identify
3rd augury, suggestion
Beginning at 10th levei, you can call on your deity to 5th nondeteetion, speak with dead
intervene on your behalf when your need is great. 7th arcane eye, eanJusion
9th legend /ore, scrying
1mploring your deity's aid requires you to use your
action. Describe the assistance you seek, and roll BLESSINGS OF KNOWLEDGE
percentile dice. If you roll a number equal to or lower At 1st leveI, you learn two languages of your choice.
than your cleric leveI, your deity intervenes. The DM Vou also become proficient in your choice of two of the
chooses the nature of the intervention; the effect of any following skills: Arcana, History, Nature, or Religion.
cleric spell or cleric domain spell would be appropriate.
Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check
lf your deity intervenes, you can't use this feature you make that uses either of those skills.
again for 7 days. Otherwise, you can use it again after
you finish a long rest. CHANNEL DIVINITY:
KNOWLEDGE OF THE AGES
At 20th leveI, your call for intervention succeeds Starting at 2nd leveI, you can use your Channel Divinity
automatically, no roll required. to tap into a divine well of knowledge. As an action,
you choose one skill or tool. For 10 minutes, you have
DIVINE DOMAINS proficiency with the chosen skill or to01.

In a pantheon, every deity has influence over different CHANNEL DIVINITY: READ THOUGHTS
aspects of mortallife and civilization, called a deity's At 6th leveI, you can use your Channel Divinity to read a
domain. Ali the domains over which a deity has creature's thoughts. Vou can then use your access to the
influence are called the deity's portfolio. For example, creature's mind to command it.
the portfolio of the Greek god Apollo includes the

P'\RT 1 C I ASSES

59


As an action, choose one creature that you can see of healing or endurance (such as IlIllatcr, Mishakal,
within 60 feet of you. That creature must make a Apollo, and Diancecht), and gods of home and
Wisdom saving throw. If the creature succeeds on the community (such as Hestia, Hathor, and Boldrei).
saving throw, you can't use this feature on it again until
you finish a long resl. LIFE DOMAIN SPELLS

If the creature fails its save, you can read its surface Cleric Levei Spells
thoughts (those foremost in its mind, reflecting its 1st
current emotions and what it is actively thinking 3 rd b/ess, cure wounds
about) when it is within 60 feet of you. This effect lasts 5th lesser restoration, spiritual weapon
for I minute. 7th beacon ofhope, revivify
9th death ward, guardian offaith
During that time, you can use your action to end this mass cure wounds, roise dead
effect and cast the suggestion spell on the creature
without expending a spell si 01. The target automatically BONUS PROFICIENCY
fails its saving throw against the spell. When you choose this domain at I st levei, you gain
proficiency with heavy armor.
POTENT SPELLCASTING
DISCIPLE OF LIFE
Starting at 8th levei, you add your Wisdom modifier to Also starting at 1st levei, your healing spells are more
the damage you deal with any cleric cantrip. effective. Whenever you use a spell of 1st levei or higher
to restore hit points to a creature, the creature regains
VISIONS OF THE PAST additional hit points equal to 2 + the spell's leveI.
Starting at 17th levei, you can call up visions of the
past that relate to an object you hold or your immediate CHANNEL DIVINITY: PRESERVE LIFE
surroundings. Vou spend at least I minute in meditation Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
and prayer, then receive dreamlike, shadowy glimpses to heal the badly injured.
of recent events. Vou can meditate in this way for a
number of minutes equal to your Wisdom score and As an action, you present your holy symbol and
must maintain concentration during that time, as if you evoke healing energy that can restorc a number of hit
were casting a spe11. points equal to five times your cleric leveI. Choose any
creatures within 30 feet of you, and divide those hit
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until points among them. This feature can restore a ereature
you finish a short or long resto to no more than half of its hit point maximum. Vou can't
use this feature on an undead or a construel.
Object Reading. Holding an object as you meditate,
you can see visions of the object's previous owner. BLESSED HEALER
After meditating for I minute, you learn how the owner Beginning at 6th levei, the healing spclls you cast on
acquired and lost the object, as well as the most recent others heal you as well. When you cast a spell of 1st
significant event involving the object and that owner. levei or higher that restores hit points to a creature
If the object was owned by another creature in the other than you, you regain hit points equal to 2 + the
recent past (within a number of days equal to your spell's leveI.
Wisdom score), you can spend I additional minute
for each owner to learn the same information about DIVINE STRIKE
that creature. At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns
Area Reading. As you meditate, you see visions when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can
of recent events in your immediate vicinity (a room, cause the attack to deal an extra Id8 radiant damage to
street, tunnel, clearing, or the like, up to a 50-foot cube), the targel. When you reach 14th levei, the extra damage
going back a number of days equal to your Wisdom increases to 2d8.
score. For each minute you meditate, you learn about
one significant event, beginning with the most recenl. SUPREM E HEALING
Significant events typically involve powerful emotions, Starting at 17th levei, when you would normally roll
such as battles and betrayals, marriages and murders, one or more dice to restore hit points with a spell, you
births and funerais. However, they might also include instead use the highest number possible for each die.
more mundane events that are nevertheless important For example, instead of restoring 2<16hit points to a
in your current situation. creature, you restore 12.

LIFE DOMAIN LIGHT DOMAIN

The Life domain focuses on the vibrant positive Gods of light-including Hehn, Lathander, Pholtus,
energy-one of the fundamental forces of the universe- Branchala, the Silver Flame, Be1enus, Apollo, and
that sustains alllife. The gods of life pro mote vitality Re-Horakhty-promote the ideais af rebirth and
and health through healing the sick and wounded, renewal, truth, vigilance, and beauty, often using the
caring for those in need, and driving away the forces of symbol of the sun. Some af thcse go<ls are portrayed
death and undeath. Almost any non-evil deity can claim as the sun itself or as a charioteer who guides the sun
influence over this domain, particularly agricultural
deities (such as Chauntea, Arawai, and Demeter), sun
gods (such as Lathander, Pelor, and Re-Horakhty), gods

60 PART 1 , CLASSES


across the sky. Olhers are tireless sentinels whose eyes
pierce every shadow and see through every deception.
Some are deities of heauty and artistry. who teach that
art is a vehic1e for the soul"s improvemenl. Clerics of a
god oflight are enlightened souls infused with radiance
and the power of (heir gods' discerning vision, charged
with chasing away lies and burning away darkness.

LICHT DOMAIN SPELLS

Cleric Levei Spells
1st
3rd burning hand',jaerie fire
5th Jlaming 'phere, ,eorching ray
7th day/ight,fireball
9th guardian offoith, wall offire
Jlame ,trike, ,crying

BONUS CANTRIP NATURE DOMAIN
When you choose this domain at 1st levei, you gain the
Jight cantrip ifyou don't already know il. Gods of nature are as varied as the natural world
itself, from illscrutable gods of the deep forests (such
WARDING FLARE as Silva nus, Obad-Hai, Chislev, Balinor, and Pan) to
Also at 1st leveI, YOll can interpose divine light between friendly deities associated with particular springs and
yourself and an altacking enemy. When you are altacked groves (such as Eldath). Druids revere nature as a
bya creature within 30 feet of you that you can see, whole and might serve one of these deities, practicing
you can use your reaction to impose disadvantage on mysterious rites and reciting all-but-forgolten prayers in
the attack roll, causing light to fiare before the attacker their own secret tongue. But many of these gods have
before it hits or misses. An attacker that can't be blinded c1erics as well, champions who take a more active role
is immune to this feature. in advancing the interests of a particular nature god.
These c1erics might hunt the evil monstrosities that
Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to despoil the woodlands, bless the harvest of the faithful,
your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). Vou regain or wither the crops of those who anger their gods.
ali expended uses when you finish a long resl.
NATURE DOMAIN SPELLS
CHANNEL DIVINITY: RADIANCE OF THE DAWN
Starting at 2nd leveI, you can use your Channel Divinity Cleric Levei Spells
to harness sunlight, banishing darkness and dealing 1st
radiant damage to your foes. 3rd animal friend,hip, speak with animais
5th bark,kin, 'pike growth
As an action, you present your holy symbol, and any 7th plant growth, wind wall
magical darkness within 30 feet of you is dispelled. 9th dominate beast, gra'ping vine
Additionally, each hostile creature within 30 feel of inseet plague, tree stride
you must make a Constitution saving throw. A creature
takes radiant damage equal to 2d 1O + your c1eric leveI
on a failed saving throw, and half as much damage on a
successful one. A creature that has total cover from you
is not affected.

IMPROVED FLARE
Starting at 6th levei, you can also use your Warding
Fiare feature when a creature thal you can see within
30 feet of you attacks a creature other than YOU.

POTENT SPELLCASTING
Starting at 8th leveI, you add your Wisdom modifier to
the damage you deal with any c1eric cantrip.

CORONA OF LIGHT
Starting at 17th levei, you can use your action to activate
an aura of sunlight that Jasts for 1 minute or until you
dismiss it using another action. Vou emit bright light in
a 60-foot radius and dim light 30 feet beyond tha!. Your
enemies in the bright Iight have disadvalltage on saving
throws against any spell that deals fire or radiant damage.

PART I CLASSES 6


ACOLYTE OF NATURE righteousness or to encourage them to offer sacritices of
At 1st leveI, you learn one druid cantrip of your choice. propitiation to ward off divine wrath.
Vou also gain proticiency in one of the following skills of
your choice: Animal Handling, Nature, or Survival. TEMPEST DOMAIN SPELLS

BONUS PROFICIENCY Cleric Levei Spells
Also at 1st leveI, you gain proticiency with heavyarmor. 1st fog c1oud, thunderwave
3rd gust of wind, shatter
CHANNEL DIVINITY: CHARM ANIMALS 5th call fightning, sleet storm
AND PLANTS 7th control wate" ice storm
Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity 9th destructive wave, insect plague
to charm animaIs and plants.
BONUS PROFICIENCIES
As an action, you present your holy symbol and invoke At 1st leveI, you gain proticiency with martia! weapons
the name of your deity. Each beast or plant creature that and heavy armor.
can see you within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom
saving throw. If the creature fails its saving throw, it is WRATH OF THE STORM
charmed by you for 1 minute or until it takes damage. Also at 1st levei, you can thunderously rebuke attackers.
While it is charmed by you, it is friendly to you and other When a creature within 5 feet of you that you can see
creatures you designate. hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to
cause the creature to make a Dexterity saving throw.
DAMPEN ELEMENTS The creature takes 2d8 lightning or thunder damage
Starting at 6th leveI, when you or a creature within 30 (your choice) on a failed saving throw, and half as much
feet of you takes acid, cold, tire, lightning, or thunder damage on a successful one.
damage, you can use your reaction to grant resistance to
the creature against that instance of the damage. Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to
your Wisdom moditier (a minimum of once). Vou regain
DIVINE STRIKE ali expended uses when you tinish a long rest.
At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns CHANNEL DIVINITY: DESTRUCTIVE WRATH
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you Starting at 2nd leveI, you can use your Channel Divinity
can cause the attack to deal an extra Id8 cold, tire, or to wield the power of the storm with unchecked ferocity.
lightning damage (your choice) to the target. When you
reach 14th leveI, the extra damage increases to 2d8. When you rolllightning or thunder damage, you can
use your Channel Divinity to deal maximum damage,
MASTER OF NATURE instead of rolling.
At 17th leveI, you gain the ability to command animais
and plant creatures. While creatures are charmed by THUNDERBOLT STRIKE
your Charm Animais and Plants feature, you can take At 6th leveI, when you deallightning damage to a Large
a bonus action on your turn to verbally command what or smaller creature, you can also push it up to 10 feet
each of those creatures will do on its next turno away from YOU.

TEMPEST DOMAIN DIVINE STRIKE
At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
Gods whose portfolios include the Tempest domain- strikes with divine energy. Once on each ofyour turns
including Talos, Umberlee, Kord, Zeboim, the when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can
Devourer, Zeus, and Thor-govern storms, sea, and cause the attack to deal an extra ld8 thunder damage to
sky. They include gods of lightning and thunder, gods the target. When you reach 14th levei, the extra damage
of earthquakes, some tire gods, and certain gods of increases to 2d8.
violence, physical strength, and courage. In some
pantheons, a god of this domain rules over other deities STORMBORN
and is known for swift justice delivered by thunderbolts. At 17th levei, you have a flying speed equal to
In the pantheons of seafaring people, gods of this your current walking speed whenever you are not
domain are ocean deities and the patrons of sailors. underground or indoors.
Tempest gods send their clerics to inspire fear in the
common folk, either to keep those folk on the path of TRICKERY DOMAIN

Gods of trickery-such as Tymora, Beshaba,
Olidammara, the Traveler, Gari Glittergold, and
Loki-are mischief-makers and instigators who stand
as a constant challenge to the accepted order among
both gods and mortais. They're patrons of thieves,
scoundrels, gamblers, rebels, and liberators. Their
clerics are a disruptive force in the world, puncturing
pride, mocking tyrants, stealing from the rich, freeing
captives, and flouting hollow traditions. They prefer

PART 1 I CLASSES
6~


subterfuge, pranks, deception, and theft rather than watch over warriors and reward them for their great
direct confrontation. deeds. The clerics of such gods excel in battle, inspiring
others to fight the good fight or offering acts ofviolence
TRICKERY DOMAIN SPELLS as prayers. Gods of war include champions of honor
and chivalry (such as Torm, Heironeous, and Kiri-
Clerie levei Spells Jolith) as well as gods of destruction and pillage (such
1st charm persan, disguise seI[ as Erythnul, the Fury, Gruumsh, and Ares) and gods of
3rd mirror imoge, pass without trace conquest and domination (such as Bane, Hextor, and
5th blink, dispel magic Maglubiyet). Other war gods (such as Tempus, Nike,
7th dimension door, po/ymorph and Nuada) take a more neutra! stance, promoting war
9th dominate person, modify memory in ali its manifestations and supporting warriors in any
circumstance.

BLESSING OF THE TRICKSTER WAR DOMAIN SPELLS
Starting when you choose this domain at 1st levei, you
can use your action to touch a willing creature other Clerie levei Spells
than yourseif to give it advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) 1st divine favor, shield offaith
checks. This blessing lasts for I hour or until you use 3rd magic weapon, spiritual weapon
this feature again. 5th crusader's mantle, spirit guardians
7th freedom of movement, stoneskin
CHANNEL DIVINITY: INvOKE DUPLICITY 9th fiame strike, hold monster
Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
to create an illusory duplicate of yourself. BONUS PROFICIENCIES
At 1st levei, you gain proficiency with martial weapons
As an action, you create a perfect illusion of and heavy armor.
yourself that !asts for I minute, or until you lose your
concentration (as if you were concentrating on a spell). WAR PRIEST
The iIlusion appears in an unoccupied space that you From 1st !evel, your god delivers bolts of inspiration to
can see within 30 feet of you. As a bonus action on your you while you are engaged in battle. When you use the
turn, you can move the illusion up to 30 feet to a space Attack action, you can make one weapon attack as a
you can see, but it must remain within 120 feet of you. bonus action.

For the duration, you can cast spells as though you Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to
were in the iIlusion's space, but you must use your own your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). You regain
senses. Additionally, when both you and your illusion ali expended uses when you finish a long rest.
are within 5 feet of a creature that can see the illusion,
you have advantage on attack rolls against that creature, CHANNEL DIVINITY: GUIDED STRIKE
given how distracting the illusion is to the target. Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
to strike with supernatural accuracy. When you make
CHANNEL DIVINITY: CLOAK OF SHADOWS an attack roll, you can use your Channel Divinity to gain
Starting at 6th leveI, you can use your Channel a +10 bonus to the roll. You make this choice after you
Divinity to vanish. see the roll, but before the DM says whether the attack
hits or misses.
As an action, you become invisible until the end of your
next turno You become visible if you attack or cast a spell. CHANNEL DIVINITY: WAR GOD'S BLESSING
At 6th levei, when a creature within 30 feet of you
DIVINE STRIKE makes an attack roll, you can use your reaction to grant
At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon that creature a +10 bonus to the roll, using your Channel
strikes with poison-a gift from your deity. Once on each Divinity. Vou make this choice after you see the roll, but
of your turns when you hit a creature with a weapon before the DM says whether the attack hits or misses.
attack, you can cause the attack to deal an extra Id8
poison damage to the target. When you reach 14th levei, DIVINE STRIKE
the extra damage increases to 2d8. At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns
IMPROVED DUPLICITY when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can
At 17th levei, you can create up to four duplicates cause the attack to deal an extra Id8 damage of the
of yourseif, instead of one, when you use Invoke same type dealt by the weapon to the target. When you
Duplicity. As a bonus action on your turn, you can reach 14th levei, the extra damage increases to 2d8.
move any number of them up to 30 feet, to a maximum
range of 120 feet. AVATAR OF BATTLE
At 17th levei, you gain resistance to bludgeoning, piercing,
WARDoMAIN and slashing damage from nonmagical weapons.

War has many manifestations. lt can make heroes of
ordinary people. It can be desperate and horrific, with
acts of cruelty and cowardice eclipsing instances of
excellence and courage. In either case, the gods of war

PART 1 I CL-\SSES


DRUID

Holding high a gnarled slaff wrealhed wilh holly, an elf
summons lhe fury of lhe slorm and calls down explosive
bolls of lighlning to smile lhe lorch-carrying orcs who
lhrealen her forest.

Crouching oul of sighl on a high tree branch in lhe
form of a leopard, a human peers oul of lhe jungle aI lhe
slrange conslruclion of a lemple of Evil Elemenlal Air,
keeping a close eye on lhe cullists' aclivilies,

Swinging a blade formed of pure fire, a half-elf
charges inlo a mass of skeletal soldiers, sundering
lhe unnalural magic lhat gives the foul crealures the
mocking semblance of life,

Whelher calling on lhe elemenlal forces of nalure or
emulaling the crealures of lhe animal world, druids are
an embodimenl of nature's resilience, cunning, and fury,
They claim no maslery over nalure. Inslead, lhey see
lhemselves as exlensions of nalure's indomilable will.

POWER OF NATURE

Druids revere nalure above ali, gaining lheir spells and
olher magical powers eilher from the force of nalure
ilself or fram a nalure deily. Many druids pursue a
myslic spiriluality of lranscendent union with nature
ralher than devotion to a divine entity, while others
serve gods of wild nature, animais, or elemental forces.
The ancienl druidic lraditions are sometimes called
the Old Failh, in contrast to the worship of gods in
temples and shrines.

Druid spells are oriented toward nature and animals-
the power of toolh and claw, of sun and moon, of fire
and storm. Druids also gain the ability to take on animal
forms, and some druids make a particular study of this
practice, even to the point where they prefer animal
form to their natural formo

PRESERVE THE BALANCE

For druids, nature exists in a precarious balance. The
four elements that make up a world-air, earth, fire,

P,\RT I CLASSES


Levei Proficiency Features Cantrips -Spell Slots per Spell Level-
1st Bonus Druidic,Spellcasting Known
2nd +2 Wild Shape, Druid Cirele 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
3rd +2 2 2
4th +2 Wild Shape improvement, 2 3
+2 Ability Score Improvement 2 42
3 43
Druid Cirele feature
5th +3 3 432
6th +3 Wild Shape improvement, 3 433
7th +3 Ability Score Improvement 3 4331
8th +3 3 4332
Druid Circle feature
9th +4 3 43331
10th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4 43332
11th +4 4 43332
12th +4 Druid Cirele feature 4 43332
13th +5 4 43332
14th +5 Ability Score Improvement 4 43332
15th +5 4 43332
16th +5 Timeless Body, Beast Spells 4 43332
17th +6 Ability Score Improvement 4 4 3332
18th +6 Archdruid 4 43333
19th +6 4 43333
20th +6 4 43333

and water-must remain in equilibrium. If one element as a sign that becoming a druid
were to gain power over the others, the world could be was part of your character's destiny.
destroyed, drawn into one of the eJemental planes and
broken apart into its component elements. Thus, druids Have you aJways been an adventurer
oppose cults of Elemental Evil and others who promote as part of your druidic calling, or did you
one element to the exclusion of others. first spend time as a caretaker of a sacred
grove or spring? Perhaps your homeland was
Druids are also concerncd with the deJicate ecological befouled by evil, and you took up an adventuring life in
balance that sustains plant and animallife, and the need hopes of finding a new home or purpose.
for civilized folk to live in harmony with nature, not in
opposition to it. Druids accept that which is cruel in QUICK BUILD
nature, and they hate that which is unnatural, including VOU can make a druid quickly by following these
aberrations (such as beholders and mind f1ayers) suggestions. First, Wisdom should be your highest
and undead (such as zombies and vampires). Druids ability score, followed by Constitution. Second, choose
sometimes lead raids against such creatures, espccially the hermit background.
when the monsters encroach on the druids' territory.
CLASS FEATURES
Druids arc often found guarding sacred sites or
watching over regions of unspoiled nature. But when a As a druid, you gain the following class features.
significant danger arises, threatening nature's balance
or the lands they protecl, druids take on a more active HIT POINTS
role in combating the threal, as adventurers. Ui! Dice: Id8 per druid levei
Uit Points at 1st Levei: 8 + your Constitution modifier
CREATING A DRUID Ui! Points at Uigher Leveis: Id8 (or 5) + your

When making a druid, consider why your character has Constitution modifier pcr druid levei after 1st
such a close bond with nature. Perhaps your character
lives in a society where the Old Faith slill thrives, or was PROFICIENCIES
raised bya druid after being abandoned in the depths Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields (druids will
of a forcst. Perhaps your character had a dramatic
encounter with the spirits of nature, coming face to not wear armor or use shields made of metal)
face with a giant eagle or dire wolf and surviving lhe Weapons: Clubs, daggers, darts, javelins, maces,
experience. Maybe your character was born during an
epic storm or a volcanic eruption, which was interpreled quarlerstaffs, scimitars, sickles, slings. spears
Tools: Herbalism kit

Saving Throws: Intelligcnce, Wisdom

PART 1 I Cl~SSES


Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Animal one spell). The spells must be of a levei for which you
Handling, Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception, have spell slots.
Religion, and Survival
For example, if you are a 3rd-Ievel druid, you have four
EQUIPMENT 1st-levei and two 2nd-levei spell slots, With a Wisdom
Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to of 16, your list of prepared spells can include six spells
the equipment granted by your background: of 1st ar 2nd levei, in any combination. If you prepare
the lst.level spell cure wounds, you can cast it using
(a) a wooden shield or (b) any simple weapon a 1st-levei ar 2nd-levei slot. Casting the spell doesn't
(a) a scimitar or (b) any simple melee weapon remove it from your list of prepared spells,
Leather armor, an explorer's pack, and a druidic focus
Vou can also change your list of prepared spells when
DRUIDIC you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of druid
spells requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at
Vou know Druidic, the secret language of druids. Vou least 1 minute per spelllevel for each spell on your list.
can speak the language and use it to leave hidden
messages. Vou and others who know this language SPELLCASTING ABILITY
automatically spot such a message. Others spot lhe Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your druid
message's presence with a successful DC 15 Wisdom spells, since your magic draws upon your devotion and
(Perception) check but can't decipher it without magic. attunement to nature. Vou use your Wisdom whenever
a spell refers to your spellcasting ability. [n addition,
SPELLCASTING you use your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving
throw DC for a druid spell you cast and when making an
Drawing on the divine essence of nature itself, you attack roll with one.
can cast spells to shape that essence to your will. See
chapter 10 for the general rules of spellcasting and Spell save DC~ 8 + your profícíencybonus +
chapter 11 for the druid spell list. your Wisdom modifier

CANTRIPS Spell attack modifier~ your proficiencybonus +
At 1st levei, you know two cantrips of your choice from your Wisdom modifier
the druid spelllist. Vou learn additional druid cantrips
of your choice at higher leveis, as shown in the Cantrips RITUAL CASTING
Known column of the Druid table. Vou can cast a druid spell as a ritual if that spell has the
ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.
PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS
SPELLCASTING Focus
The Druid table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st leveI and higher. To cast one of Vou can use a druidic focus (found in chapter 5) as a
these druid spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's spellcasting focus for your druid spells.
levei ar higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when
you finish a long rest. WILD SHAPE

Vou prepare the list of druid spells that are available Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your action to
for you to cast, choosing from the druid spell list. When magically assume the shape of a beast that you have
you do so, choose a number of druid spells equal to seen before, Vou can use this feature twice. Vou regain
your Wisdom modifier + your druid levei (minimum of expended uses when you finish a short ar long rest.

Â~ Your druid levei determines the beasts you can
transform into, as shown in the Beast Shapes table. At
SACREO PLANTS ANO WOOO 2nd levei, for example, you can transform into any beast
that has a challenge rating of 1(4 ar lower that doesn't
Adruid holds certain plants to be sacred, particularlyalder, have a f1yingar swimming speed,
ash, birch,elder, hazel, holly,juniper, mistletoe, oak, rowan,

willow,and yew.Druids often use such plants as part of a BEAST SHAPES
spellcastíng focus, incorporating lengths of oak or yewor

sprigs of mistletoe. Levei Max. CR Limitations Example
Similarly,a druid uses such woods to make other objects, 2nd 1/4 No fiyingor swimming speed Wolf
4th 1/2 No fiyingspeed Crocodile
such as weapons and shields. Yewis assocíated wíth death 8th 1 Giant eagle

and rebirth, so weapon handles for scimitars or sickles might

be fashioned from il. Ash is assocíated with lifeand oak

with strength. These woods make excellenthafts or whole Vou can stay in a beast shape for a number of hours
weapons, such as c1ubsor quarterstaffs, as wellas shields. eqllalto halfyollr drllid levei (rollnded down). YOllthen
Alderis assocíated wíth air,and it might be used for thrown revert to your normal form unless you expend another
use of this feature. Vou can revert to your normal
weapons, such as darts or javelins. form earlier by using a bonus action on your turn, Vou
automatically revert if YOllfali unconscious, drop to
Druids from regions that lackthe plants described here
have chosen other plants to take on similar uses. For O hit points, or die.
instance, a druid of a desert region might value the yucca While you are transformed, the following rules apply:

tree and cactus plants. ••

••

PART 1 I CLASSES
66


Vour game statistics are replaced by the statistics of TIMELESS BODY
the beast, but you retain your alignment, personality,
and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. Vou Starting at 18th leveI, the primaI magic that you wield
also retain ali of your skill and saving throw proficien- causes you to age more slowly. For every 10 years that
cies, in addition to gaining those of the creature. If pass, your body ages only 1 year.
the creature has the same proficiency as you and the
bonus in its stat block is higher than yours, use the BEAST SPELLS
creature's bonus instead of yours. lf the creature has
any legendary or lair actions, you can't use them. Beginning at 18th leveI, you can cast many of your druid
When you transform, you assume the beast's hit spells in any shape you assume using Wild Shape. Vou
points and Hit Dice. When you revert to your normal can perform the somatic and verbal components of a
form, you return to the number of hit points you had druid spell while in a beast shape, but you aren't able to
before you transformed. However, if you rever! as a provide material components.
result of dropping to O hit points, any excess damage
carries over to your normal formo For example, if you ARCHDRUID
take lO damage in animal form and have only 1 hit
point left, you revert and take 9 damage. As long as At 20th levei, you can use your Wild Shape an unlimited
the excess damage doesn't reduce your normal form number of times.
to O hit points, you aren't knocked unconscious.
Vou can't cast spells, and your ability to speak or
take any action that requires hands is limited to the
capabilities of your beast formo Transforming doesn't
break your concentration on a spell you've already
cast, however, or prevent you from taking actions that
are part of a spell, such as caJl Jightning, that you've
already cast.
Vou retain the benefit of any features from your class,
race, or other source and can use them if the new
form is physically capable of doing so. However, you
can't use any of your special senses, such as darkvi-
sion, unless your new form also has that sense.
Vou choose whether your equipment falls to the
ground in your space, merges into your new form, or
is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as normal,
but the DM decides whether it is practical for the new
form to wear a piece of equipment, based on the crea-
ture's shape and size. Vour equipment doesn't change
size or shape to match the new
form, and any equipment that
the new form can't wear
must either fali to the
ground or merge with it.
Equipment that merges
with the form has no
effect until you leave
the formo

DRUID CIRCLE

At 2nd levei, you choose to
identify with a circle of druids:
the Circle of the Land or the Circle of the Moon, both
detailed at the end of the class description. Vour choice
grants you features at 2nd levcl and again at 6th, 10th,
and 14th leveI.

ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of
your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores
of your choicc by 1. As normal, you can't increase an
ability score above 20 using this feature.


Additionally, you can ignore the verbal and somatic ARCTIC Circle Spells
components of your druid spells, as well as any material hold person, spike growth
components that lack a cost and aren't consumed bya Druid Levei sleet storm, slow
spell. Vou gain this benefit in both your normal shape 3rd freedom of movement, ice storm
and your beast shape from Wild Shape, 5th com mune with nature, cone of cold
7th
DRUID CIRCLES 9th

Though their organization is invisible to most outsiders, COAST Circle Spells
druids are part of a society that spans the land, ignoring mirror image, misty step
political borders, Ali druids are nominally members Druid Levei water breathing, water walk
of this druidic society, though some individuais are so 3rd control water,freedom of movement
isolaled lhat lhey have never seen any high-ranking 5th conjure elemental, scrying
members of the society or participated in druidic 7th
gatherings. Druids recognize each other as brothers and 9th
sislers, Like creatures of the wilderness, however, druids
somelimes compete with or even prey on each other, DESERT Circle Spells
blur, silence
At a local scale, druids are organized into circles that Druid Levei create food and water, protection from energy
share certain perspectives on nature, balance, and the 3rd blight, haf/ucinatory terrain
way of the druid, 5th insect plague, waf/ of stone
7th
CIRCLE OF THE LAND 9th

The Circle of the Land is made up of mystics and sages FOREST Circle Spells
who safeguard ancient knowledge and rites through barkskin, spider c/imb
a vast oral tradition, These druids meet within sacred Druid Levei caf/lightning, plant growth
circles of trees or standing slones to whisper primai 3rd divination,freedom of movement
secrets in Druidic, The circle's wisest members preside 5th com mune with nature, tree stride
as the chief priests of communities lhat hold to the Old 7th
Faith and serve as advisors to the rulers of those folk, 9th
As a member of this circle, your magic is inl1uenced
by the land where you were initiated into the circle's GRASSLAND Circle Spells
mysterious rites. invisibility, pass without trace
Druid Levei daylight, haste
BONUS CANTRIP 3rd divination,freedom of movement
5th dream, insect plague
When you choose this circle aI 2nd leveI, you learn one 7th
additional druid cantrip of your choice. 9th

NATURAL RECOVERY MOUNTAIN Circle Spells
spider c/imb, spike growth
Starling at 2nd levei, you can regain some of your Druid Levei lightning bolt, meld into stone
magical energy by sitting in meditation and communing 3rd stone shape, stoneskin
with nature, During a short rest, you choose expended 5th passwall, waf/ of stone
spell slots to recover. The spell slols can have a 7th
combined levei that is equal to or less lhan half your 9th
druid levei (rounded up), and none of the slots can be
6th levei or higher. Vou can't use this feature again until SWAMP Circle Spells
you finish a long rest darkness, Melf's acid arrow
Druid Levei water walk, stinking c/oud
For example, when YOllare a 4th-levei druid, YOllcan 3rd freedom of movement, loca te creature
recover up to two leveis worth of spell slots, Vou can 5th insect plague, scrying
recover either a 2nd-levei slot or two 1sI-leveI slots, 7th
9th
CIRCLE SPELLS
UNDERDARK Circle Spells
Vour mystical connection to the land infllses you with spider climb, web
lhe ability lo cast certa in spells, At 3rd, 5th, 7th, and Druid Levei gaseous form, stinking c/oud
9th levei you gain access to circle spells connecled 3rd greater invisibility, stone shape
to the land where YOllbecame a drllid, Choose that 5th c/oudkif/, insect plague
land-arctic, coast, desert, forest, grassland. mountain, 7th
swamp, or Underdark-and consult the associated 9th
list of spells,

Once YOllgain access lo a circle spell. YOllalways have
il prepared, and it doesn't count against the nllmber of
spells you can prepare each day.lfyoll gain access to a
spell that doesn't appear on the drllid spelllist, the spell
is nonetheless a drllid spell for YOll,

PART 1 I CLASSES
68


LAND'S STRIDE PRIMAL STRIKE
Starting at 6th levei, moving through nonmagical Starting at 6th levei, your attacks in beast form eount as
difficult terrain costs you no extra movement. Vou can magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and
also pass through nonmagical plants without being immunity to nonmagieal attaeks and damage.
slowed by them and without taking damage from them if
they have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard. ELEMENTAL WILD SHAPE
At 10th levei, you can expend two uses of Wild Shape
In addition, you have advantage on saving throws against at the same time to transform into an air elemental, an
plants that are magically created or manipulated to impede earth elemental, a fire elemental, or a water elemental.
movement, such those created by the entangle spell.
THOUSAND FORMS
NATURE'S WARD By 14th levei, you have learned to use magie to alter
When you reach 10th levei, you can't be charmed or your physical form in more subtle ways. Vou can cast the
frightened by elementals or fey, and you are immune to alter self spell at will.
poison and disease.
•• •••
NATURE'S SANCTUARY DRUIOS ANO THE COOS
When you reach 14th levei, creatures of the natural
world sense your connection to nature and become Some druids venerate the forces of nature themselves, but
hesitant to attack you. When a beast or plant creature most druids are devoted to one of the many nature deities
attacks you, that creature must make a Wisdom saving worshiped in the multiverse (the Iists of gods in appendix
throw against your druid spell save DC. On a failed save, B inelude many such deities). The worship ofthese deities
the creature must choose a different target, or the attack is often considered a more ancient tradition than the faiths
automatically misses. On a successful save, the creature of elerics and urbanized peoples. In fact, in the world of
is immune to this effect for 24 hours. Greyhawk, the druidic faith is called the Old Faith, and it
elaims many adherents among farmers, foresters, fishers,
The creature is aware of this effect before it makes its and others who live elosely with nature. This tradition
attack against you. ineludes the worship of Nature as a primai force beyond
personification, but also encompasses the worship of Beory,
CIRCLE OF THE MOON the Oerth Mother, as well as devotees ofObad.Hai, Ehlonna,
and Ulaa.
Druids of the Circle of the Moon are fierce guardians
of the wilds. Their order gathers under the full moon to In the worlds of Greyhawk and the Forgotten Realms,
share news and trade warnings. They haunt thc deepest druidic cireles are not usually connected to the faith of a
parts of the wilderness, where they might go for weeks single nature deity. Any given cirele in the Forgotten Realms,
on end before crossing paths with another humanoid for example, might inelude druids who revere Silvanus,
creature, let alone another druid. Mielikki, Eldath, Chauntea, or even the harsh Gods of Fury:
Talos, Malar, Auril, and Umberlee. These nature gods are
Changeable as the moon, a druid of this circle might often called the First Cirele, the first among the druids, and
prowl as a great cat one night, soar over the treetops most druids count them ali (even the violent ones) as worthy
as an eagle the next day, and crash through the
undergrowth in bear form to drive off a trespassing af veneration.
monster. The wild is in the druid's blood. The druids of Eberron hold animistic beliefs completely

COMBAT WILD SHAPE unconnected to the Sovereign Host, the Dark Six, or any of
When you choose this circle at 2nd levei, you gain the the other religions of the world. They believe that every living
ability to use Wild Shape on your turn as a bonus action, thing and every natural phenomenon-sun, moon, wind,
rather than as an action. fire, and the world itself-has a spiri!. Their spells, then, are
a means to communicate with and command these spirits.
Additionally, while you are transformed by Wild Different druidic sects, though, hold different philosophies
Shape. you can use a bonus action to expend one about the pro per relationship of these spirits to each other
spell slot to regain ld8 hit points per levei of the spell and to the forces of civilization. The Ashbound, for example,
slot expended. believe that arcane magic is an abomination against nature,
the Children ofWinter venerate the forces of death, and the
CIRCLE FORMS Gatekeepers preserve ancient traditions meant to protect the
The rites ofyour circle grant you the ability to transform world from the incursion of aberrations.
into more dangerous animal forms. Starting at 2nd
levei, you can use your Wild Shape to transform into a
beast with a challenge rating as high as 1 (you ignore
the Max. CR eolumn of the Beast Shapes table, but must
abide by the other limitations there).

Starting at 6th levei, you can transform into a beast
with a challenge rating as high as your druid leveI
divided by 3, rounded down.

CLASSES h9


FIGHTER

A human in clanging plate armor holds her shield
before her as she runs toward the massed goblins. An
elf behind her, clad in studded leather armor, peppers
the goblins with arrows loosed from his exquisitc
bow. The half-orc nearby shouls orders, helping
lhe lwo combalanls coordinate their assault to the
best advantage.

A dwarf in chain mail interposes his shield between
the ogre's club and his companion, knocking the dcadly
blow aside. His companion, a half-elf in scale armor,
swings two scimitars in a blinding whirl as she circles
the ogre, looking for a blind spot in its defenses.

A gladiator fighls for sport in an arena, a master with
his trident and net, skilled at toppling foes and moving
them around for the crowd's delight-and his own
tactical advantage. His opponent's sword fiares with
blue light an instant beforc she sends lightning fiashing
forth to smite him.

Ali of these heroes are fighlers, perhaps the most
diverse class of characters in the worlds of DUNGEONS &
DRAGONS. Questing knighls, conquering overlords, royal
champions, elite foot soldiers, hardened mercenaries,
and bandit kings-as fighters, they ali share an
unparalleled mastery with weapons and armor, and a
thorough knowledge of the skills of combat. And they
are well acquainted with death, both meting it out and
staring it defiantly in lhe face.

WELL-RoUNDED SPECIALISTS

Fighters learn the basics of ali combat styles. Every
fighter can swing an axe, fence wilh a rapier, wield a
longsword or a grealsword, use a bow, and even trap foes
in a net with some degree of skill. Likewise, a fighler is
adept with shields and every form of armor. Beyond that
basic degree of familiarity, each fighler specializes in a
cerlain style of combat. Some concentrate on archery,
some on fighting with two weapons aI once, and some
on augmenting their martial skills with magic. This
combination of broad general ability and extensive
specialization makes fighters superior combatants
on battlefields and in dungeons alike.

TRAINED FOR DANGER
•
Nol every member of the cily walch, lhe village mililia,
or the queen's army is a fighter. Mosl of these lroops are
relatively untrained soldiers wilh only lhe mosl basic
combat knowledge. Veleran soldiers, mililary officers,
lrained bodyguards, dedicated knighls, and similar
figures are fighlers.

PART 1 I CLASSES
70


THE FICHTER

Levei Proficiency Features
1st Bonus
2nd +2 Fighting Style, Second Wind
3rd +2 Action Surge (one use)
4th +2 Martial Arehetype
5th +2 Ability Seore Improvement
6th +3 Extra Attaek
7th +3 Ability Score Improvement
8th +3 Martial Archetype feature
9th +3 Ability Seore Improvement
10th +4 Indomitable (one use)
11th +4 Martial Arehetype feature
12th +4 Extra Attaek (2)
13th +4 Ability Seore Improvement
14th +5 Indomitable (two uses)
15th +5 Ability Seore Improvement
16th +5 Martial Arehetype feature
17th +5 Ability Seore Improvement
+6 Aetion Surge (two uses). Indomitable
(three uses)
18th +6 Martial Arehetype feature
19th +6 Ability Seore Improvement
20th +6 Extra Attaek (3)

Some fighters feel drawn to use their training as to buy them. Your armaments are now among your
adventurers. The dungeon delving, monster slaying, and most important possessions-the only things that stand
other dangerous work common among adventurers is between you and death's embrace.
second nature for a fighter, not ali that different from
the life he ar she left behind. There are greater risks, QUICK BUILD
perhaps, but also much greater rewards-few fighters in Vou can make a fighter quickly by following these
the city watch have the opportunity to discover a magic suggestions. first, make Strength ar Dexterity your
flame tongue sword, for example. highest ability score, depending on whether you
want to focus on melee weapons ar on archery (ar
CREATING A FIGHTER finesse weapons). Your next-highest score should be
Constitution, ar Intelligence if you plan to adopt the
As you build your fighter, think about two related Eldritch Knight martial archetype. Second, choose
elements ofyour character's background: Where did the soldier background.
you get your combat training, and what set you apar!
from the mundane warriors around you? Were you CLASS FEATURES
particularly ruthless? Did you get extra help from a
mentor, perhaps because of your exceptional dedication? As a fighter, you gain the following class features.
What drove you to this training in the first place? A
threat to your homeland, a thirsl for revenge, ar a need HIT POINTS
to prove yourself might ali have been factors. Ui! Dice: IdlO per fighter levei
Ui! Points at 1st Levei: 10 + your Constitution modifier
Vou might have enjoyed formal training in a noble's Uit Points at Uigher LeveIs: IdlO (ar 6) + your
army ar in a local militia. Perhaps you trained in a war
academy, learning strategy, tactics, and military history. Constitution modifier per fighter levei after 1st
Or you mighl be self-taught-unpolished but well tested.
Did you take up the sword as a way to escape the limits PROFICIENCIES
of life on a farm, ar are you following a proud family Armar: Ali armar, shields
tradition? Where did you acquire your weapons and Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
armar? They might have been military issue ar family Tools: Nane
heirlooms. ar perhaps you scrimped and saved for years
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
71
PART 1 I CL~SSES


Skills: Choose two skills from Acrobatics, Animal Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or
Handling, Athletics, History, [nsight, [ntimidation, long rest before you can use it again. Starting at 17th
Perception, and Survival levei, you can use it twice before a rest, but only once on
the same turno
EQUIPMENT
MARTIAL ARCHETYPE
Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background: At 3rd leveI, you choose an archetype that you strive to
emulate in your combat styles and techniques. Choose
(a) chain mail or (b) leather, longbow, and 20 arrows Champion, Battle Master, or Eldritch Knight, ali detailed
(a) a martial weapon and a shield or (b) two martial at the end of the c1ass description. The archetype you
weapons choose grants you features at 3rd leveI and again at 7th,
(a) a Iight crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) two handaxes 10th, 15th, and 18th leveI.
(a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
FIGHTING STYLE
When you reach 4th levei, and again at 6th, 8th, 12th,
Vou adopt a particular style of fighting as your specialty, 14th, 16th, and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability
Choose one of the following options. Vou can't take a score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability
Fighting Style option more than once, even if you later se ores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase
get to choose again. ao ability score above 20 using this feature.

ARCHERY EXTRA ATTACK

Vou gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
ranged weapons. once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno

DEFENSE The number of attacks increases to three wheo you
reach 11th leveI in this c1ass and to four when you reach
While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC. 20th leveI in this c1ass.

DUELING INDOMITABLE

When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and Beginning at 9th leveI, you can reroll a saving throw that
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls you fail. If you do 50, Yotl must use the new roll, and you
with that weapon, can't use this feature again until you finish a long resto

GREAT WEAPON FIGHTING Vou can use this feature twice between [ong rests
starting at 13th levei and three times between long rests
When you roll a 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack you starting at 17th leveI.
make with a melee weapon that you are wielding with
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new MARTIAL ARCHETYPES
roll, even if the new roll is a 1 or a 2. The weapoo must
have the two-handed or versatile property for you to gaio Different fighters choose different approaches to
this benefit. perfectiog their fighting prowess. The martial archetype
you choose to emulate renects your approach.
PROTECTION
CHAMPION
When a creature you can see attacks a target other
than you that is within 5 feet of YOtl,you can use your The archetypal Champion focuses on the development
reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack roll. Vou of raw physical power honed to deadly perfection.
must be wielding a shield. Those who model themselves on this archetype combine
rigorous traioing with physical excellence to deal
TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING devastati ng blows.

When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add IMPROVED CRITICA L
your ability modifier to the damage of lhe second attack.
Beginning when you choose this archetype at 3rd
SECOND WIND leveI, your weapon attacks score a criticaI hit on a
roll of 19 or 20.
Vou have a limited well of stamina that you can draw on
to protect YOtlrself from harm. On your turn, you can use REMARKABLE ATHLETE
a bonus action to regain hit points equal to ld10 + your
fighter leveI. Starting at 7th level, you can add half yotlr proficiency
bonus (round up) to any Strength, Dexterity, or
Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or Constitutioo check you make that doesn't already use
long rest before you can use it again. your proficiency bonus.

ACTION SURGE [n addition, when you makc a running longjump, the
distance you can cover increases by a number of feet
Starting at 2nd leveI, Yotlcan push yourself beyond yotlr equal to yotlr Strength modifier.
normallimits for a momento On your turn, you can take
one additional action on top of your regular action and a
possible bonus action.

PART 1 I CLASSES
72


ADDITIONAL FIGHTING STYLE

At 10th levei, you can choose a second option from the
Fighting Style class feature.

SUPERIOR CRITICAL

Starting at 15th leveI, your weapon attacks score a
criticaI hit on a roll of 18-20.

SURVIVOR

At 18th levei, you attain the pinnacle of resilience in
battle. At the start of each of your turns, you regain hit
points equal to 5 + your Constitution modifier if you
have no more than half of your hit points left. Vou don't
gain this benefit if you have O hit points.

BATTLE MASTER

Those who emulate the archetypal Battle Master
employ martial techniques passed down through
generations. To a Battle Master, combat is an academic
field, sometimes including subjects beyond battle such
as weaponsmithing and calligraphy. Not every fighter
absorbs the lessons of history, theory, and artistry
that are reflected in the Battle Master archetype, but
those who do are well-rounded fighters of great skill
and knowledge.

COMBAT SUPERIORITY

When you choose this archetype at 3rd leveI, you
learn maneuvers that are fueled by special dice called
superiority dice.

Maneuvers. Vou learn three maneuvers of your
choice, which are detailed under "Maneuvers" below.
Many maneuvers enhance an atlack in some way. Vou
can use only one maneuver per attack.

Vou learn two additional maneuvers ofyour choice
at 7th, 10th, and 15th leveI. Each time you learn new
maneuvers, you can also replace one maneuver you
know with a different one.

Superiority Diee. Vou have four superiority dice,
which are d8s. A superiority die is expended when you
use it. Vou regain ali of your expended superiority dice
when you finish a short or long rest.

Vou gain another superiority die at 7th leveI and one
more aI 15th leveI.

Saving Throws. Some of your maneuvers require
your target lO make a saving throw to resist the
maneuver's effects. The saving throw DC is calculated
as follows:

Maneuver save De ~ 8 + your profieieney bonus +

your 5trength or Dexterity modifier (your ehoiee)

STUDENT OF WAR

At 3rd leveI, you gain proficiency with one type of
artisan's tools of your choice.

KNOW YOUR ENEMY

Starting at 7th levei, if you spend at least 1 minute
observing or interacting with another creature outside
combat, you can learn certain information about its
capabilities compared to your own. The DM tells you if
lhe creature is your equal, superior, or inferior in regard
to two of the following characteristics ofyour choice:

PA TI (l '\SSES "3


Strength score Maneuveríng Attack. When you hit a creature with
Dexterity score a weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
Constitution score die to maneuver one of your comrades into a more
Armor Class advantageous position, Vou add the superiority die to the
Current hit points attack's damage roll, and you choose a friendly creature
Total class leveIs (if any) who can see or hear you, That creature can use its
Fighter class leveIs (if any) reaction to move up to half its speed without provoking
opportunity attacks from the target of your attack.
IMPROVED COMBAT SUPERIORITY
At 10th levei, your superiority dice turn into dlOs, At MenaCÍngAttack. When you hit a creature with a
18th levei, they turn into d 12s, weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
attempt to frighten the target. Vou add the superiority
RELENTLESS die to the attack's damage roll, and the target must
Starting at 15th levei, when you roll initiative and make a Wisdom saving throw, On a failed save, it is
have no superiority dice remaining, you regain 1 frightened of you until the end of your next turn,
superiority die,
Parry. When another creature damages you with a
MANEUVERS mele e attack, you can use your reaction and expend one
The maneuvers are presented in alphabetical order, superiority die to reduce the damage by the number you
roll on your superiority die + your Dexterity modifier,
Commander's Stríke. When you take the Attack
action on your turn, you can forgo one of your attacks PreCÍsíon Attack. When you make a weapon attack
and use a bonus action to direct one of your companions roll against a creature, you can expend one superiority
to strike, When you do so, choose a friendly creature die to add it to the rol\. Vou can use this maneuver
who can see or hear you and expend one superiority die, before or after making the attack roll, but before any
That creature can immediately use its reaction to make effects of the attack are applied,
one weapon attack, adding the superiority die to the
attack's damage rol\. Pushíng Attack. When you hit a creature with
a weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
Dísarmíng Attack. When you hit a creature with a die to attempt to drive the target back. Vou add the
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to superiority die to the attack's damage roll, and if the
attempt to disarm the target, forcing it to drop one item target is Large or smaller, it must make a Strength
of your choice that it's holding, Vou add the superiority saving throw, On a failed save, you push the target up
die to the attack's damage roll, and the target must to 15 feet away from you,
make a Strength saving throw, On a failed save, it drops
the object you choose, The object lands at its fee!. Rally. On your turn, you can use a bonus action and
expend one superiority die to bolster the resolve of one
Dístractíng Strike. When you hit a creature with a of your companions. When you do so, choose a friendly
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to creature who can see or hear you, That creature gains
distract the creature, giving your allies an opening, Vou temporary hit points equal to the superiority die roll +
add the superiority die to the attack's damage rol\. The your Charisma modifier,
next attack roll against the target by an attacker other
than you has advantage if the attack is made before the Ríposte. When a creature misses you with a melee
start of your next turn, attack, you can use your reaction and expend one
superiority die to make a melee weapon attack against
Evasíve Footwork. When you move, you can expend the creature, ]f you hit, you add the superiority die to the
one superiority die, rolling the die and adding the attack's damage rol\.
number rolled to your AC until you stop moving,
Sweepíng Attack. When you hit a creature with a
Feíntíng Attack. Vou can expend one superiority die melee weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
and use a bonus action on your turn to feint, choosing die to attempt to damage another creature with the
one creature within 5 feet of you as your targe!. Vou same attack, Choose another creature within 5 feet
have advantage on your next attack roll against that of the original target and within your reach, If the
creature, If that attack hits, add the superiority die to the original attack roll would hit the second creature, it
attack's damage rol\. takes damage equal to the number you roll on your
superiority die, The damage is of the same type dealt by
Goadíng Attack. When you hit a creature with a the original attack,
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
attempt to goad the target into attacking you, Vou add TrípAttack. When you hit a creature with a weapon
the superiority die to the attack's damage roll, and attack, you can expend one superiority die to attempt
the target must make a Wisdom saving throw, On a to knock the target down, Vou add the superiority die
failed save, the target has disadvantage on ali attack to the attack's damage roll, and if the target is Large or
rolls against targets other than you until the end of smaller, it must make a Strength saving throw, On a
your next turn, failed save, you knock the target prone,

Lungíng Attack. When you make a melee weapon ELDRITCH KNIGHT
attack on your turn, you can expend one superiority die
to increase your reach for that attack by 5 feet. ]f you hit, The archetypal Eldritch Knight combines the martial
you add the superiority die to the attack's damage rol\. mastery common to ali fighters with a careful study of
magic. Eldritch Knights use magical techniques similar
to those practiced by wizards, They focus their study

PART 1 I CLASSES
74


on two of the eight schools of magic: abjuration and ELDRITCH KNIGHT SPELLCASTlNG
evocation. Abjuration spells grant an Eldritch Knight
additional protection in battle, and evocation spells deal FIghter Cantrips Spells -Spell Slots per Spell Level-
damage to many foes at once, extending the fighter's Levei Known Known 2nd 3rd 4th
reach in combat. These knights learn a comparatively 3rd 1 st
small number of spells, committing them to memory 4th 2 3 2 2
instead of keeping them in a spellbook. 2 4 3 2
5th 2 4 3 2
SPELLCASTING 6th 2 4 3 3
When you reach 3rd levei, you augment your martial 7th 2 5 4 3
prowess with the ability to cast spells. See chapter 10 8th 2 6 4 3
for the general rules of spellcasting and chapter 11 for 9th 2 6 4 32
the wizard spelllist. 10th 3 7 4 32
11th 3 8 4 32
Cantrips. Vou learn two cantrips of your choice fram 12th 3 8 4 33
the wizard spell list. Vou learn an additional wizard 13th 3 9 4 33
cantrip of your choice at 10th leveI. 14th 3 10 4 33
15th 3 10 4 33
SpeJl Slots. The Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table 16th 3 11 4 33
shows how many spell slots you have to cast your 17th 3 11 4
spells of 1st leveI and higher. To cast one of these 18th 3 11 4
spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's levei or 19th 3 12 4
higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you 20th 3 13 4
finish a long rest.
during a short rest. The weapon must be within your
For example, if you know the Ist.level spell shieId and reach throughout the ritual, at the conc1usion of which
have a Ist.level and a 2nd.level spell slot available, you you touch the weapon and forge the bond.
can cast shieId using either slot.
ance you have bonded a weapon to yourself, you
SpeJls Known of 1st-LeveI and Higher. Vou know can't be disarmed of that weapon unless you are
three 1st.level wizard spells of your choice, two of which incapacitated. lf It is on the same plane of existence,
you must choose from the abjuration and evocation you can summon that weapon as a bonus action on your
spells on the wizard spelllist. turn, causing it to teleport instantiy to your hand.

The Spells Known column of the Eldritch Knight Vou can have up to two bonded weapons, but can
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard summon only one at a time with your bonus action.
spells of 1st levei or higher. Each of these spells must be 1fyou attempt to bond with a third weapon, you must
an abjuration or evocation spell of your choice, and must break the bond with one of the other two.
be of a leveI for which you have spell slots. For instance,
when you reach 7th levei in this c1ass, you can learn one WAR MAGIC
new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI. Beginning at 7th levei, when you use your action to
cast a cantrip, you can make one weapon attack as a
The spells you learn at 8th, 14th, and 20th leveI can bonus actiou.
come from any school of magic.
ELDRITCH STRIKE
Whenever you gain a leveI in this c1ass, you can At 10th levei, you learn how to make your weapon
replace one of the wizard spells you know with another strikes undercut a creature's resistance to your spells.
spell of your choice from lhe wizard spelllist. The When you hit a creature with a weapon attack, that
new spell must be of a leveI for which you have spell creature has disadvantage on the next saving throw
slots, and it must be an abjuration or evocation spell, it makes against a spell you cast before the end of
unless you're replacing the spell you gained at 8th, 14th, your next turno
or 20th leveI.
ARCANE CHARGE
Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting At 15th levei, you gain the ability to teleport up to 30
ability for your wizard spells, since you learn your feet to an unoccupied space you can see when you use
spells through study and memorization. Vou use your your Action Surge. Vou can teleport before or after the
lntelligence whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting additional actioll.
ability. In addition, you use your Intelligence modifier
IMPROVED WAR MAGIC
when setting lhe saving throw De for a wizard spell you Starting at 18th levei, when you use your action to
cast a spell, you can make one weapon attack as a
cast and when making an attack roll with one. bonus actiOIl.

Spell save DC ~ 8 + your proficiency bonus +

your Intelligence modifier

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus +

your Intelligence modifier

WEAPON BOND
At 3rd levei, you learn a ritual that creates a magical
bond between yourself and one weapon. Vou perform
the ritual over the course of I hour, which can be done

PART I C'l~SSES


J Her fists a blur as lhey detlect an incoming hail of arrows,
a half-elf springs over a barrieade and lhrows herself
PART I I CLASSES into lhe massed ranks of hobgoblins on lhe olher side.
She whirls among lhem. knocking lheir blows aside and
sending them reeling. unlil allasl she slands alone.

Taking a deep breath. a human eovered in tattoos
seltles inlo a battle stanee. As lhe tirsl eharging ores
reaeh him. he exhales and a blasl of tire roars from his
moulh, engulting his foes.

Moving wilh lhe silenee of lhe nighl, a blaek-c1ad
halfling sleps inlo a shadow benealh an areh and
emerges from anolher inky shadow on a balcony a
stone's lhrow away. She slides her blade free of ils c1oth-
wrapped seabbard and peers lhrough lhe open window
aI lhe lyranl prinee. so vulnerable in lhe grip of sleep.

Whalever lheir discipline, monks are uniled in lheir
abilily lo magically harness lhe energy lhal tlows in
lheir bodies. Whelher ehanneled as a slriking display
of eombal prowess or a subI ler foeus of defensive abilily
and speed, lhis energy infuses alllhal a monk does.

THE MAGIC OF KI

Monks make eareful sludy of a magieal energy lhal mos I
monaslie lradilions eall ki. This energy is an elemenl
of lhe magie lhal suffuses lhe mulliverse-speeitieally,
lhe elemenl lhat flows lhrough Iiving bodies. Monks
harness this power wilhin lhemsclves lo ereate magieal
effeels and exeeed their bodies' physieal eapabililies.
and some of lheir special attaeks ean hinder lhe tlow of
ki in lheir opponenls. Using lhis energy. monks ehannel
uneanny speed and slrenglh inlo lheir unarmed slrikes.
As lhey gain experienee. lheir marlial lraining and lheir
maslery ofki gives them more power over lheir bodies
and lhe bodies of their foes.

TRAINING AND ASCETICISM

Small walled c10islers doI the landseapes of lhe worlds
of 0&0. liny refuges from the tlow of ordinary Iife,
where time seems lo stand stil!. The monks who live
lhere seek personal perfeetion lhrough eonlemplation
and rigorous lraining. Many enlered lhe monastery
as ehildren. senl lo Iive lhere when lheir parents died,
when food eouldn't be found lo sllpport lhem, or in
return for some kindness that the monks had performed
for lheir families.

Some monks Iive entirely apart from the surrollnding
populalion. secluded from anyl hing lhat might impede
their spirilllal progresso Olhers are sworn lo isolalion,


Proficieney Marlial Ki Unarmored Features
Bonus Arls Points Movement Unarmored Defense, Martial Arts
ld4 Ki, Unarmored Movement
1st +2 1d4 2 +10 ft. Monastie Tradition, Defleet Missiles
2nd +2 ld4 3 +10 fI. Ability Seore Improvement, Slow Fali
3rd +2 1d4 4 +10 fI. Extra Attaek, Stunning Strike
4th +2 1d6 5 +10 ft. Ki-Empowered Strikes, Monastie Tradition feature
5th +3 1d6 6 +15 ft. Evasion, Stillness of Mind
6th +3 ld6 7 +15 ft. Ability Seore Improvement
7th +3 1d6 8 +15 ft. Unarmored Movement improvement
8th +3 1d6 9 +15 ft. Purity of Body
9th +4 ld6 10 +20 ft. Monastic Tradition feature
10th +4 ld8 11 +20 fI. Ability Seore Improvement
11th +4 ld8 12 +20 fI. Tongue of the Sun and Moon
12th +4 ld8 13 +20 fI. Diamond Sou I
13th +5 ld8 14 +25 fI. Timeless Body
14th +5 ld8 15 +25 fI. Ability Seore Improvement
15th +5 1d8 16 +25 fI. Monastie Tradition feature
16th +5 1d10 17 +25 fI. Empty Body
17th +6 1d10 18 +30 fI. Ability Score Improvement
18th +6 ldlO 19 +30 ft. Perfeel Self
19th +6 ldl0 20 +30 ft.
20th +6

emerging only lo serve as spies or assassins ai the As a result of the structured life of a monastic
command of lheir leader, a noble palron, or some other community and the discipline required lOhamess ki,
morlal or divine power. monks are almosl always lawful in alignmenl.

The majorily of monks don'l shun Iheir neighbors, QUICK BUILD
making frequenl visilS lO nearhy lowns or villages and Vou can make a monk quickly by following lhese
exchanging Iheir servicc for food and other goods. As suggestions. First, make Dexlerily your highesl
versalile warriors, monks oflen end up prolecting their ability score, followed by Wisdom. Second, choose the
neighbors fram monsters or Iyranls. hermit background.

For a monk, bccoming an advenlllrer means leaving CLASS FEATURES
a struelured, communallift'slyle lo beco me a wanderer.
This can be a harsh transition, and monks don't As a monk, you gain the following class features.
undertake illightly. Those who leave their cloisters take
their work seriollsly, approaching Iheir adventures as HIT POINTS
personal tesls of Iheir physical and spiritual growth. Hil Dice: Id8 per monk levei
As a rule, monks care lillle for material wealth and are Hil Poinls aI Is1 Levei: 8 + your Conslilution modifier
driven by a desire lo aceomplish a grealer mission than Hil Points aI Higher LeveIs: Id8 (or 5) + your
merely slaying monsters and plundering Iheir treasure.
Constitution modifier per monk levei afler IsI
CREATING A MONK
PROFICIENCIES
As you make your monk characler, Ihink about your Armor: None
connection lO lhe monaslery where you leamed your Weapons: Simple weapons, shortswords
skills and spenl your formal ive years. Were you an Tools: Choose one type of arlisan's lools or one
orphan or a child left on lhe monaslery's threshold? Did
your parents promise YOlllo the monastery in gratitude musical inslrumenl
for a service performed by lhe lllonks? Did you enler
Ihis secluded life lo hide from a crime you committed? Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Or did you choosc the monaslic life for yourself? Skills: Choose two from Acrobatics, Athletics, History,

Consider why you lefl. Did lhe head of your monastery lnsight, Religion, and Stealth
choose you for a parliclllarly imporlant mission beyond
the cloisler? Perhaps you \Vere casl out because of EQUIPMENT
some violalion of lhe communily's rules. Did you dread Vou start with lhe following equipment, in addilion lo
leaving, or were you happy lo go? ls Ihere somelhing the equipment granled by your background:
you hope lo accomplish oulside lhe monastery? Are you
eager lo relum to your home? (a) a shortsword or (b) any simple weapon
(a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
10 darts 77

PART 1 CL"':)SES


UNARMORED DEFENSE FLURRY OF BLOWS
Immediately after you take the Attack action on your
Beginning at 1st leveI, while you are wearing no armor turn, you can spend I ki point to make two unarmed
and not wielding a shield, your AC equals 10 + your strikes as a bonus action.
Dexterity modifier + your Wisdom modifier.
PATIENT DEFENSE
MARTIAL ARTS Vou can spend I ki point to take the Dodge action as a
bonus action on your turno
At 1st leveI, your practice of martial arts gives you
mastery of combat styles that use unarmed strikes and STEP OF THE WIND
monk weapons, which are shortswords and any simple Vou can spend I ki point to take the Disengage or Dash
melee weapons that don't have the two-handed or action as a bonus action on your turn, and your jump
heavy property. distance is doubled for the turno

You gain the folIowing benefits while you are unarmed UNARMORED MOVEMENT
or wielding only monk weapons and you aren't wearing
armor or wielding a shield: Starting at 2nd levei, your speed increases by 10 feet
while you are not wearing armor or wielding a shield.
You can use Dexterity instead of Strength for the This bonus increases when you reach certain monk
attack and damage rolIs of your unarmed strikes and leveis, as shown in the Monk table.
monk weapons.
Vou can rolI a d4 in place of the normal damage At 9th levei, you gain the ability to move along vertical
ofyour unarmed strike or monk weapon. This die surfaces and across liquids on your turn without falIing
changes as you gain monk leveis, as shown in the during the move,
Martial Arts column of the Monk table.
When you use the Attack action with an unarmed MONASTIC TRADITION
strikc or a monk weapon on your turno you can make
one unarmed strike as a bonus action. For example, if When you reach 3rd levei, you commit yourself to a
you take the Attack action and attack with a quarter- monastic tradition: the Way of the Open Hand, the Way
staff, you can also make an unarmed strike as a bonus of Shadow, or the Way of the Four Elements, alI detailed
action, assuming you haven't already taken a bonus at the cnd of the class description. Your tradition
action this turn, grants you features at 3rd levei and again at 6th, 11th,
and 17th leveI.
Certain monasteries use specialized forms ofthe
monk weapons. For example, you might use a cluh DEFLECT MISSILES
that is two lengths ofwood connected bya short chain
(calIed a nunchaku) or a sickle with a shorter, straighter Starting at 3rd leveI, you can use your reaction to
blade (called a kama), Whatever name you use for a deflect or catch the missile when you are hit by a ranged
monk weapon. you can use the game statistics provided weapon attack. When you do so, the damage you take
for the weapon in chapter 5. from the attack is reduced by IdlO + your Dexterity
modifier + your monk leveI.
KI
If you reduce the damage to O,you can catch the
Starting at 2nd levei, your training alIows you to missile if it is smalI enough for you to hold in one hand
harness the mystic energy of ki. Your access to this and you have at least one hand free, If you catch a
energy is represented bya number of ki points. Your missile in this way, you can spend I ki point to make a
monk levei determines the number of points you have, ranged attack with the weapon or piece of ammunition
as shown in the Ki Points column of the Monk table, you just caught, as part of the same reaction. Vou make
this attack with proficiency, regardless of your weapon
You can spend these points to fuel various ki features. proficiencies, and the missile counts as a monk weapon
You start knowing three such features: Flurry of Blows, for the attack.
Patient Defcnse, and Step of the Wind, You learn more
ki features as you gain leveis in this class, ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you spend a ki poinl. it is unavailable until When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
you finish a short or long rest, at the end of which you and 19th leveI. you can increase one ability score of your
draw alI of your expended ki back into yourself. Vou choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
must spend at least 30 minutes of the rest meditating to your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
rega in your ki points, score above 20 using this feature,

Some ofyour ki features require your target to make SLOW FALL
a saving throw to resist the feature's effects. The saving
throw DC is calculated as folIows: Beginning at 4th levei, you can use your reaction when
you falI to reduce any falIing damage you take by an
Ki save De = 8 + your proficiency bonus + amount equal to five times your monk leveI.

your Wisdom modifier

PART I I CLASSES


EXTRA ATTACK During that time, YOllalso have resistance to ali damage
but force damage.
Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno Additionally, you can spend 8 ki points to cast the
astral projection spell, withollt needing material
STUNNING STRIKE components. When you do so. YOllcan't take any other
creatures with YOll.
Starting at 5th leveI, you can interfere with the flow of
ki in an opponent's body. When you hit another creature PERFECT SELF
with a melee weapon attack. you can spend 1 ki point to
attempt a stunning strike. The target must succeed on a At 20th leveI, when you roll for initiative and have no ki
Constitution saving throw or be stunned until the end of points remaining, you regain 4 ki points.
YOllrnext turno
MONASTIC TRADITIONS
KI-EMPOWERED STRIKES
Three traditions of monastic pllrsuit are common in
Starting at 6th leveI, your unarmed strikes count as the monasteries scattered across the multiverse. Most
magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and monasteries practice one tradition exclusively, bllt a
immunity to nonmagical attacks and damage. few honor the three traditions and instruct each monk
according to his or her aptitude and interest. Ali three
EVASION traditions rely on the same basic techniques. diverging
as the stlldent grows more adept. ThllS, a monk need
At 7th leveI, YOllrinstinctive agility lets you dodge choose a tradition only upon reaching 3rd leveI.
out of the way of certain area effects, such as a blue
dragon's Iightning breath or a firebalJ spell. When YOll WAY OF THE OPEN HAND
are subjected to an effect that allows you to make a
Dextcrity saving throw to take only half damage, you Monks of the Way of the Open Hand are the lIltimate
instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving masters of martial arts combat, whether armed or
throw, and only half damage if you fail. unarmed. They learn techniqlles to pllsh and trip their
opponents, manipulate ki to heal damage to their
STILLNESS OF MIND bodies, and practice advanced meditation that can
protect them from harm.
Starting at 7th leveI, you can use your action to end one
effect on yourself that is causing YOllto be charmed OPEN HAND TECHNIQUE
or frightened.
Starting when you choose this tradition at 3rd leveI,
PURITY OF BODY you can manipulate your enemy's ki when you harness
your own. Whenever you hit a creature with one of the
At 10th leveI, your mastery of the ki flowing throllgh you altacks granted by your Flurry of Blows, YOllcan impose
makes you immune to disease and poison. one of the following effects on that target:

TONGUE OF THE SUN AND MOON It must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Starting at 13th leveI, you learn to touch the ki of other
minds so that you understand ali spoken languages. It must make a Strength saving throw. Ir it fails, you
Moreover, any creature that can understand a langllage
can understand what you say. can push it up to 15 feet away from YOll.
It can't take reactions until the end of your next turno
DIAMOND SOUL
WHOLENESS OF BODY
Beginning at 14th leveI, your mastery of ki grants you At 6th leveI, you gain the ability to heal YOllrself.As an
proficiency in ali saving throws. action, you can regain hit points equal to three times

Additionally, whenever YOllmake a saving throw and
fail, you can spend I ki point to reroll it and take the
second result.

TIMELESS BODY

At 15th leveI, your ki sustains you so that you suffer
none of the frailty of old age, and you can't be aged
magically. Vou can still die of old age, however. In
addition, you no longer need food or water.

EMPTY BODY

Beginning at 18th leveI. you can use YOllraction to
spend 4 ki points to become invisible for 1 minute.

PART 1 CLASSES


your monk leveI. Vou musl finish a long resl before you OPPORTUNIST
can use lhis fealure again. AI 171hleveI. you can exploil a crealure's momenlary
dislraclion when il is hil by an altack. Whenever a
TRANQUILlTY creature wilhin 5 feel of you is hit by an allack made by
Beginning ai 111h levei. you can enler a special a crealure olher lhan you, you can use your reaclion to
medilalion lhal surrounds you wilh an aura of peace. AI make a melee atlack against lhal creature.
lhe end of a long resl. you gain lhe effecl of a sanctuary
spelllhal lasls unlillhe slarl of your nexllong resl (lhe WAY OF THE FOUR ELEMENTS
spell can end early as normal). The saving lhrow DC
for lhe spell equals 8 + your Wisdom modifier + your Vou follow a monastic lradilion that teaches you to
proficieney bonus. harness lhe elemenls. When you focus your ki, you can
align yourself with lhe forces of creation and bend lhe
QUIVERING PALM four elements lo your will, using lhem as an exlension
AI 171hlevei. you gain lhe ability lo sei up lelhal ofyour body, Some members oflhis lradition dedicale
vibrations in someone's body. When you hil a crealure lhemselves to a single elemenl, but others weave lhe
with an unarmed slrike. you can spend 3 ki points to elements logelher.
slart these imperceplible vibralions. which lasl for a
number of days equallo your monk leveI. The vibralions Many monks of lhis lradition lalloo lheir bodies wilh
are harmless unless you use your action lo end lhem. represenlalions of lheir ki powers. commonly imagined
To do so. you and lhe largel musl be on lhe same plane as coiling dragons. bul also as phoenixes, fish. planls,
of exislence. When you use lhis aclion. lhe crealure mounlains. and cresling waves.
musl make a Conslilulion saving throw. If it fails. it is
reduced to O hil poinls. Ifil succeeds, illakes IOdlO DISCIPLE OF THE ELEMENTS
necrotic damage. When you choose lhis lradilion ai 3rd levei, you learn
magical disciplines lhal harness lhe power of lhe four
Vou can have only one creature under lhe effecl of lhis elemenls. A discipline requires you lo spend ki points
fealure ai a lime. Vou can choose lo end the vibrations each time you use it.
harmlessly wilhout using an aclion.
Vou know lhe Elemenlal Allunemenl discipline and
WAY OF SHADOW one olher elemenlal discipline of your choice, which are
delailed in lhe "Elemental Disciplines" seclion below.
Monks of the Way of Shadow follow a lradilion lhal Vou learn one addilional elemental discipline of your
values sleallh and sublerfuge. These monks might choice ai 61h, 111h. and 17th leveI.
be called ninjas or shadowdancers. and they serve as
spies and assassins. Somelimes the members of a Whenever you learn a new elemenlal discipline,
ninja monaslery are family members, forming a clan you can also replace one elemenlal discipline lhal you
sworn to secrecy about their arts and missions. Olher already know wilh a different discipline.
monasleries are more like lhieves' guilds, hiring oul
their services lo nobles, rich merchanls, or anyone else Casting Elemental Spells. Some elemenlal
who can pay lheir fees. Regardless of their melhods, lhe disciplines allow you to casl spells. See chapter 10 for
heads of lhese monasleries expect lhe unqueslioning lhe general rules of spellcasling. To cast one of lhese
obedience of lheir sludenls. spells, you use ils casting time and olher rules. but you
don'l need lo provide malerial componenls for it.
SHADOW ARTS
Slarling when you choose this tradition ai 3rd levei. you Once you reach 51h levei in lhis class. you can spend
can use your ki lo duplicate lhe effecls of certain spells. additional ki poinls lo increase the levei of an elemenlal
As an action. you can spend 2 ki poinls lo casl darkness, discipline spelllhal you cas!, provided lhallhe spell has
darkvision. pass without trace, or si/ence. wilhoul an enhanced effecl at a higher levei. as burning hands
providing malerial components. Addilionally. you gain does. The spell's leveI increases by 1 for each addilional
lhe minor iJlusion canlrip if you don'l already know it. ki poinl you spend. For example, if you are a 5th-levei
monk and use Sweeping Cinder Slrike lo casl burning
SHADOW STEP hands, you can spend 3 ki poinls lo casl it as a 2nd-levei
AI 61h levei. you gain lhe abilily lo slep from one shadow spell (lhe discipline's base cosi of 2 ki poinls plus I).
into anolher. When you are in dim Iighl or darkness.
as a bonus aclion you can leleporl up to 60 feel to an The maximum number of ki poinls you can spend lo
unoccupied space you can see that is also in dim lighl casl a spell in lhis Way (including ils base ki point cosi
or darkness. Vou lhen have advanlage on lhe firsl melee and any addilional ki poinls you spend lOincrease its
altack you make before the end of the lurn. levei) is delermined by your monk levei. as shown in lhe
Spells and Ki Poinls table.
CLOAK OF SHADOWS
By 111h leveI, you have learned lo beco me one wilh $PELLS ANO KI POINTS
lhe shadows. When you are in an area of dim lighl or
darkness, you can use your aclion lo become invisible. Monk Leveis Maximum Ki Points for a Spell
Vou remain invisible until you make an altack. casl a 5th-8th 3
spell. or are in an area of brighl light. 9th-12th 4
13th-16th 5
17th-201h 6

80 PART I I CLASSES


ELEMENTAL DISCIPLINES Shape the Flowing River. As an action, you can

The elemental disciplines are presented in alphabetical spend I ki point to choose an area of ice or water no
arder. ]f a discipline requires a leveI, you must be that
leveI in this class to learn the discipline. larger than 30 feet on a side within 120 feet of YOU. Vou

Breath ofWinter (17th LeveI Required). Vou can can change water to ice within the area and vice versa,
spend 6 ki points to cast cone of cold.
and you can reshape ice in the area in any manner you
Clench ofthe North Wind (6th LeveI Required). Vou
can spend 3 ki points to cast hold person. choose. Vou can raise or lower the ice's elevation, create
ar fil! in a trench, erect or !latten a wal!, or form a pil!ar.
Elemental Attunement. Vou can use your action to
brie!ly control elemental forces nearby, causing one of The extent of any such changes can't exceed half the
the fol!owing effects of your choice:
area's largest dimensiono For example, if you affect a
Create a harmless, instantaneous sensory effect
related to air, earth, fire, or water, such as a shower of 30-foot square, you can create a pillar up to 15 feet high,
sparks, a puff of wind, a spray of light mist, or a gentle
rumbling of stone. raise or lower the square's elevation by up to 15 feet, dig
Instantaneously light ar snuff out a candIe, a torch, ar
a smal! campfire. a trench up to 15 feet deep, and so on. Vou can't shape
Chill or warm up to I pound of nonliving material for
up to I hour. the ice to trap or injure a creature in the area.
Cause earth, fire, water, or mist that can fit within a
I-foot cube to shape itself into a crude form you desig- Sweeping Cinder Strike. Vou can spend 2 ki points to
nate for I minute. cast burning hands.

Eternal Mountain Defense (11th LeveI Required). Water Whip. Vou can spend 2 ki points as a bonus
Vou can spend 5 ki points to cast stoneskin,
targeting yourself. action to create a whip of water that shoves and pul!s

Fangs ofthe Fire Snake. When you use the Atlack a creature to unbalance lI. A creature that you can see
action on your turn, you can spend I ki point to cause
tendrils of !lame to stretch out from your fists and feel. that is within 30 feet of you must make a Dexterity
Your reach with your unarmed strikes increases by
10 feet for that action, as wel! as the rest of the turn. saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d 10
A hit with such an attack deals fire damage instead of
bludgeoning damage, and if you spend I ki point when bludgeoning damage, plus an extra IdlO bludgeoning
the attack hits, it also deals an extra IdlO fire damage.
damage for each additional ki point you spend, and you
Fist ofFour Thunders. Vou can spend 2 ki points to
cast thunderwave. can either knock it prone or pul! it up to 25 feet closer

Fist ofUnbroken Air. Vou can create a blast of to YOU. On a successful save, the creature takes half as
compressed air that strikes like a mighty fisl. As an much damage, and you don't pul! It or knock it prone.
action, you can spend 2 ki points and choose a creature
within 30 feet of YOU. That creature must make a Wave ofRolling Earth (17th LeveI Required). Vou
Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature
takes 3dl0 bludgeoning damage, plus an extra IdlO can spend 6 ki points to cast wall of stone.
bludgeoning damage for each additional ki point you
spend, and you can push the creature up to 20 feet away •• ••
from you and knock it prone. On a successful save, the MONASTIC ORDERS
creature takes half as much damage, and you don't push
it or knock it prone. lhe worlds of D&D contain a multitude of monasteries

Flames ofthe Phoenix (11th LeveI Required). Vou and monastic traditions. In lands with an Asian cultural
can spend 4 ki points to cast fireball.
flavor, such as Shou Lung far to the east of the Forgotten
Gong ofthe Summit (6th LeveI Required). Vou can
spend 3 ki points to cast shatter. Realms, these monasteries are associated with philosophical

Mist Stance (11th LeveI Required). Vou can spend 4 traditions and martial arts practice. lhe Iron Hand School,
ki points to cast gaseous form, targeting yourself.
the Five Stars School, the Northern Fist School, and
Ride the Wind (11th LeveI Required). Vou can spend
4 ki points to cast fiy, targeting yourself. the Southern Star School ofShou Lung teach different

RiverofHungry Flame (17th LeveI Required). Vou approaches to the physical, mental, and spiritual disciplines
can spend 5 ki points to cast wall of fire.
of the monk. Some of these monasteries have spread to the
Rush ofthe Gale Spirits. Vou can spend 2 ki points
to cast gust of wind. western lands of FaerOn, particularly in places with large

Shou immigrant communities. such as lhesk and Westgate.
Other monastic traditions are associated with deities who

teach the value of physical excellence and mental discipline.

In the Forgotten Realms, the order ofthe Dark Moon is

made up of monks dedicated to Shar (goddess of loss), who

maintain secret communities in remote hills, back allies,

and subterranean hideaways. Monasteries of IImater (god

of endurance) are named after flowers, and their orders
carry the names of great heroes of the faith; the Disciples of

Saint Sollars the lwice-Martyred reside in the Monastery of

the Yellow Rose near Damara. lhe monasteries of Eberron

combine the study of martial arts with a life of scholarship.

Most are devoted to the deities of the Sovereign Hosl.

In the world of Dragonlance, most monks are devoted to

Majere, god of meditation and thoughl. In Greyhawk, many

monasteries are dedicated to Xan Yae, the goddess of twilight
and the superiority of mind over matter, or to Zuoken, god of
mental and physical mastery.

lhe evil monks ofthe Scarlet Brotherhood in the world of

Greyhawk derive their fanatic zeal not from devotion to a god

but from dedication to the principies oftheir nation and their

.-.race-the belief that the Suei strand of humanity are meant

..•t•o....-rul-e t-he-wo-rl-d .--------------

PART 1 I CLASSES 81


PALADIN

Clad in plate armor that gleams in the sunlight despite
the dust and grime of long travei, a human lays down
her sword and shield and places her hands on a mortally
wounded mano Divine radiance shines from her hands,
the man's wounds knit closed, and his eyes open wide
with amazement.

A dwarf crouches behind an outcrop, his black cloak
making him nearly invisible in the night, and watches
an orc war band celebrating its recent victory. Silently,
he stalks into their midst and whispers an oath, and two
orcs are dead before they even realize he is there.

Silver hair shining in a shaft of !ight that seems to
illuminate only him, an elf laughs with exultation. His
spear flashes like his eyes as he jabs again and again
at a twisted giant, until at last his light overcomes its
hideous darkness.

Whatever their origin and their mission, paladins are
united by their oaths to stand against the forces of evil.
Whether sworn before a god's altar and the witness of
a priest, in a sacred glade before nature spirits and fey
beings, or in a moment of desperation and grief with the
dead as the only witness, a paladin's oath is a powerful
bond. lt is a source of power that turns a devout warrior
into a blessed champion.

THE CAUSE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS

A paladin swears to uphold justice and righteousness,
to stand with the good things of the world against the
encroaching darkness, and to hunt the forces of evil
wherever they lurk. Different paladins focus on various
aspects of the cause of righteousness, but all are
bound by the oaths that grant them power to do their
sacred work. Although many paladins are devoted to
gods of good, a paladin's power comes as much from a
commitment to justice itself as it does from a god.

Paladins train for years to learn the skills of combat,
mastering a variety of weapons and armor. Even so,
their martial skills are secondary to the magical power
they wield: power to heal the sick and injured, to smite
the wicked and the undead, and to protect the innocent
and those who join them in the fight for justice.

BEYOND THE MUNDANE LIFE

Almost by definition, the !ife of a paladin is an
adventuring !ife. Unless a lasting injury has taken him
ar her away from adventuring for a time, every paladin
!ives on the front !ines of the cosmic struggle against

PART I I CLASSES


Proficiency Features -Spell Slots per Spell Level- 5th
Bonus 1st 2nd 3rd 4th

1st +2 Divine Sense, Lay on Hands

2nd +2 Fighting Style, Spellcasting, Divine Smite 2
3
3rd +2 Divine Health, Sacred Oath 3
42
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 42
43
5th +3 Extra Allack 43
4 32
6th +3 Aura of Protection 4 32
4 33
7th +3 Sacred Oath feature 4 33
4 33
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement 4 33
4 33
9th +4 4 33
4 33
10th +4 Aura of Courage 4 33
4 33
11th +4 Improved Divine Smite 4 33

12th +4 Ability Score Improvement

13th +5

14th +5 Cleansing Touch

15th +5 Sacred Oath feature

16th +5 Ability Score Improvement

17th +6

18th +6 Aura improvements

19th +6 Ability Score Improvement

20th +6 Sacred Oath feature

evil. Fighters are rare enough among the ranks of the as Torm, Tyr, Heironeous,
militias and armies of the world, but even fewer people Paladine, Kiri-Jolith, DoI
can c1aim the true calling of a paladin. When they do Arrah, the Silver Flame,
receive the call, these warriors turn from their former Bahamut, Athena, Re-Horakhty,
occupations and take up arms to fight evil. Sometimes and Heimdall.
their oaths lead them into the service of the crown as
leaders of elite groups of knights, but even then their How did you experience your call to
loyalty is first to the cause of righteousness, not to serve as a paladin? Did you hear a whisper
crown and country. from an unseen god or angel while you were at
prayer? Did another paladin sense the potentia! within
Adventuring paladins take their work seriously. A you and decide to train you as a squire? Or did some
delve into an ancient ruin or dusty crypt can be a quest terrible event-the destruction of your home, perhaps-
driven bya higher purpose than the acquisition of drive you to your quests? Perhaps you stumbled into
treasure. Evillurks in dungeons and primeval forests, a sacred grove or a hidden eIven enclave and found
and even the smallest victory against it can tilt the yourself called to protect ali such refuges of goodness
cosmic balance away from oblivion. and beauty. Or you might have known from your earliest
memories that the paladin's life was your calling, almost
CREATING A PALADIN as if you had been sent into the world with that purpose
stamped on your soul.
The most important aspect of a paladin character is
the nature of his or her holy quest. Although the c1ass As guardians against the forces of wickedness,
features related to your oath don't appear until you paladins are rarely of any evil alignment. Most of them
reach 3rd levei, plan ahead for that choice by reading walk the paths of charity and justice. Consider how your
the oath descriptions at the end of the c1ass. Are you a alignment colors the way you pursue your holy quest
devoted servant of good. loyal to the gods of justice and and the manner in which you conduct yourself before
honor, a holy knight in shining armor venturing forth gods and mortaIs. Your oath and alignment might be
to smite evil? Are you a glorious champion of the light, in harmony, or your oath might represent standards of
cherishing everything beautiful that stands against the behavior that you have not yet attained.
shadow, a knight whose oath descends from traditions
older than many of the gods? Or are you an embittered QUICK BUILD
loner sworn to take vengeance on those who have done
great evil, sent as an angel of death by the gods or driven Vou can make a paIadin quickly by following these
by your need for revenge? Appendix B lists many deities suggestions. First, Strength should be your highest
worshiped by paladins throughout the multiverse, such ability score, followed by Charisma. Second, choose the
noble background.

PART I I CUSSES


CLASS FEATURES FIGHTING STYLE

As a paladin, you gain the following class features. At 2nd leveI, you adopt a style of fighting as your
specialty. Choose one of the following options. Vou can't
HIT POINTS take a Fighting Style option more than once, even if you
Hit Dice: ldl0 per paladin leveI later get to choose again.
Hit Points at 1st Levei: 10 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher Leveis: ldlO (or 6) + your DEFENSE
While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC.
Constitution modifier per paladin level after 1st
DUELING
PROFICIENCIES When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and
Armor: Ali armor, shields no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons with that weapon.
Tools: None
GREAT WEAPON FIGHTING
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma When you roll a 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack you
Skills: Choose two from Athletics, Insight, Intimidation, make with a melee weapon that you are wielding with
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new
Medicine, Persuasion, and Religion roll. The weapon must have the two-handed or versatile
property for you to gain this benefit.
EQUIPMENT
Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to PROTECTION
the equipment granted by your background: When a creature you can see attacks a target other
than you that is within 5 feet of you, you can use your
(a) a martial weapon and a shield or (b) two martial reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack roll.
weapons Vou must be wielding a shield.
(a) fivejavelins or (b) any sim pIe melee weapon
(a) a priest's pack or (b) an explorer's pack SPELLCASTING
Chain mail and a holy symbol
By 2nd levei, you have learned to draw on divine
DIVINE SENSE magic through meditation and prayer to cast spells as
a cleric does. See chapter 10 for the general rules of
The presence of strong evil registers on your senses like spellcasting and chapter 11 for the paladin spell listo
a noxious odor, and powerful good rings like heavenly
music in your ears. As an action, you can open your PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS
awareness to detect such forces. Until the end of your The Paladin table shows how many spell slots you have
next turn, you know the location of any celestial, fiend, to cast your spells. To cast one of your paladin spells of
or undead within 60 feet of you that is not behind total 1st leveI or higher, you must expend a slot of the spell's
cover. Vou know the type (celestial, fiend, or undead) of leveI or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when
any being whose presence you sense, but not its identity you finish a long resto
(the vampire Count Strahd von Zarovich, for instance).
Within the same radius, you also detect the presence Vou prepare the list of paladin spells that are available
of any place or object that has been consecrated or for you to cast, choosing from the paladin spelllist.
desecrated, as with the hallow spell. When you do so, choose a number of paladin spells
equal to your Charisma modifier + half your paladin
Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to leveI, rounded down (minimum of one spell). The spells
1 + your Charisma modifier. When you finish a long rest, must be of a leveI for which you have spell slots.
you regain ali expended uses.
For example, if you are a 5th-leveI paladin, you have
LAY ON HANDS four 1st-leveI and two 2nd-leveI spell slots. With a
Charisma of 14, your list of prepared spells can include
Your blessed touch can heal wounds. Vou have a pool four spells of 1st or 2nd levei, in any combination. If you
of healing power that replenishes when you take a long prepare the 1st-levei spell cure wounds, you can cast
rest. With that pool, you can restore a total number of it using a 1st-leveI or a 2nd-leveI slot. Casting the spell
hit points equal to your paladin leveI x 5. doesn't remove it from your list of prepared spells.

As an action, you can touch a creature and draw Vou can change your list of prepared spells when you
power from the pool to restore a number of hit points finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of paladin spells
to that creature, up to the maximum amount remaining requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least I
in your pool. minute per spelllevel for each spell on your list.

Alternatively, you can expend 5 hit points from your SPELLCASTING ABILITY
pool of healing to cure the target of one disease or Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your paladin
neutralize one poison affecting it. Vou can cure multi pIe spells, since their power derives from the strength of
diseases and neutralize multi pIe poisons with a single
use of Lay on Hands, expending hit points separately
for each one.

This feature has no effect on undead and constructs.

PART 1 I CLASSES


your convictions. Vou use your Charisma whenever a ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you
use your Charisma modifier when setting the saving When you reach 4th leveI, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
throw DC for a paladin spell you cast and when making and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of your
an attack roll with one. choice by 2, ar you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
Spell save De ~ 8 + your proficiency bonus + score above 20 using this feature.
your (harisma modifier
EXTRA ATTACK
Spell attack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus +
your (harisma modifier Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno
SPELLCASTING Focus
AURA OF PROTECTION
Vou can use a holy symbol (found in chapter 5) as a
spellcasting focus for your paladin spells. Starting at 6th leveI, whenever you ar a friendly creature
within 10 feet of you must make a saving throw, the
DIVINE SMITE creature gains a bonus to the saving throw equal to your
Charisma modifier (with a minimum bonus of +1). Vou
Starting at 2nd leveI, when you hit a creature with a must be conscious to grant this bonus.
melee weapon attack, you can expend one paladin spell
slot to deal radiant damage to the target, in addition to At 18th levei, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.
the weapon's damage. The extra damage is 2d8 for a
1st-levei spell slot, plus ld8 for each spelllevel higher AURA OF COURAGE
than 1st, to a maximum of 5d8. The damage increases
by ld8 if the target is an undead or a fiend. Starting at 10th leveI. you and friendly creatures
within 10 feet of you can't be frightened while you
DIVINE HEALTH are conscious.

By 3rd levei, the divine magic flowing through you At 18th levei, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.
makes you immune to disease.
IMPROVED DIVINE SMITE
SACRED OATH
By 11th leveI, you are so suffused with righteous
When you reach 3rd leveI, you swear the oath that binds rnight that ali your melee weapon strikes carry divine
you as a paladin forever. Up to this time you have been power with them. Whenever you hit a creature with a
in a preparatory stage, committed to the path but not meIee weapon, the creature takes an extra ld8 radiant
yet sworn to it. Now you choose the Oath of Devotion, damage. lf you also use your Divine Smite with an
the Oath of the Ancients, ar the Oath of Vengeance, all attack, you add this damage to the extra damage of your
detailed at the end of the c1ass description. Divine Smite.

Your choice grants you features at 3rd leveI and again CLEANSING TOUCH
at 7th, 15th, and 20th leveI. Those features include oath
spells and the Channel Divinity feature. Beginning at 14th leveI, you can use your action to
end one spell on yourself ar on one willing creature
OATH SPELLS that you touch.
Each oath has a list of associated spells. Vou gain
access to these spells at the leveIs specified in the oath Vou can use this feature a number of times equal
description. Once you gain access to an oath spell, you to your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). Vou
always have it prepared. Oath spells don't count against regain expended uses when you finish a long rest.
the number of spells you can prepare each day.
SACRED OATHS
If you gain an oath spell that doesn't appear on the
paladin spelllist, the spell is nonetheless a paladin Becorning a paladin invoIves taking vows that commit
spell for you. the paladin to the cause of righteousness, an active
path of fighting wickedness. The final oath, taken
CHANNEL DIVINITY when he ar she reaches 3rd levei, is the culmination
Your oath allows you to channel divine energy to fuel of ali the paladin's training. Some characters with this
magical effects. Each ChanneI Divinity option provided c1ass don't consider themselves true paladins until
by your oath explains how to use it. they have reached 3rd levei and made this oath. For
others, the actual swearing of the oath is a formality,
When you use your ChanneI Divinity, you choose an official stamp on what has always been true in the
which option to use. Vou must then finish a short ar long paladin's heart.
rest to use your Channel Divinity again.
OATH OF DEVOTION
Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws.
When you use such an effect from this c1ass, the DC The Oath of Devotion binds a paladin to the loftiest
equals your paladin spell save De. ideaIs of justice, virtue, and arder. Sometimes called
cavaliers, white knights. ar holy warriors, these
paladins meet the ideal of the knight in shining armar.

PAR1 I I CLASSES


acting with honor in pursuit of justice and the greater 4 ••
good. They hold themselves to the highest standards of
conduct, and some, for better or worse, hold the rest of BREAKING YOUR OATH
the world to the same standards. Many who swear this
oath are devoted to gods of law and good and use their A paladin tries to hold to the highest standards of conduct,
gods' tenets as the measure of their devotion. They hold
angels-the perfect servants of good-as their ideaIs, but even the most virtuous paladin is fallible. Sometimes
and incorporate images of angelic wings into their
helmets or coats of arms. the right path proves toa demanding, sometimes a situation

TENETS OF DEVOTION calls for the lesser of two evils, and sometimes the heat of
Though the exact words and strictures of the Oath of
Devotion vary, paladins of this oath share these tenets. emotion causes a paladin to transgress his ar her oath.

Honesty. Don't lie or cheat. Let your word be A paladin who has broken a vow typically seeks absolution
your promise.
fram a eleric who shares his ar her faith ar from another
Coural1e. Never fear to act, though caution is wise.
Compassion. Aid others, protect the weak, and paladin of the same arder. The paladin might spend an ali.
punish those who threaten them. Show mercy to your
foes, but temper it with wisdom. night vigil in prayer as a sign of penitence, ar undertake a
Honor. Treat others with fairness, and let your
honorable deeds be an example to them. Do as fast ar similar act of self.denia!. After a rite of confession and
much good as possible while causing the least
amount ofharm. forgiveness, the paladin starts fresh.
Duty. Be responsible for your actions and their
consequences, protect those entrusted to your care, If a paladin willfully violates his ar her oath and shows no
and obey those who have just authority over you.
sign of repentance, the consequences can be more serious.
OATH SPELLS
Vou gain oath spells at the paladin leveIs listed. At the DM's discretion, an impenitent paladin might be

OATH OF DEVOTION SPELLS forced to abandon this elass and adopt another, ar perhaps

Paladin Levei Spells to take the Oathbreaker paladin option that appears in the

3rd protectionfrom evil and good, sanctuary Dungeon Master's Cuide. ,.
5th lesser restoration, zone oftruth
9th beacon ofhope, dispel magic ••
13th freedom of movement, guardian offaith
17th commune,jlame strike reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from
CHANNEL DIVINITY moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can use
When you take this oath at 3rd levei, you gain the
following two Channel Divinity options. the Dodge action.

Sacred Weapon. As an action, you can imbue one AURA OF DEVOTION
weapon that you are holding with positive energy, Starting at 7th levei, you and friendly creatures within
using your Channel Divinity. For I minute, you add 10 feet of you can't be charmed while you are conscious.
your Charisma modifier to attack rolls made with that
weapon (with a minimum bonus of +1). The weapon also At 18th leveI,the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.
emits bright light in a 20-foot radius and dim light 20
feel beyond that. 1fthe weapon is not already magical, it PURITY OF SPIRIT
becomes magical for the duration. Beginning at 15th levei, you are always under the effects
of a protection {rom eviJ and gaad spell.
Vou can end this effect on your turn as part of any
other action. 1fyou are no longer holding or carrying HOLY NIMBUS
this weapon, or if you fali unconscious, this effect ends.
At 20th levei, as an action, you can emanate an aura of
Turn the Unholy. As an action, you present your sunlight. For I minute, bright light shines from yau in a
holy symbol and speak a prayer censuring fiends and 30-foot radius, and dim light shines 30 feet beyond that.
undead, using your Channel Divinity. Each fiend or
undead that can see or hear you within 30 feet of you Whenever an enemy creature starts its turo in the
must make a Wisdom saving throw. 1fthe creature bright light, the creature takes lO radiant damage.
fails its saving throw, it is turned for I minute or until
it takes damage. In addition, for the duration, you have advantage on
saving throws against spells cast by fiends or undead.
A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move
as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
move to a space within 30 feet of you. It also can't take you finish a long rest.

OATH OF THE ANCIENTS

The Oath of the Ancients is as old as the race af elves
and the rituais of the druids. Sometimes called fey
knights, green knights, or horned knights, paladins who
swear this oath cast their lot with the side of the light
in the cosmic struggle against darkness beca use they
love the beautiful and life-giving things of the world,
nat necessarily because they believe in principIes of
hanor, caurage, and justice. They adorn their armor and
clothing with images of growing things-Ieaves, antlers,
or flowers-to reflect their commitment to preserving
life and light in the world.

TENETS OF THE ANCIENTS

The tenets of the Oath of the Ancients have been
preserved for uncounted centuries. This oath
emphasizes the principies of good above any concerns
of law or chaos. Its faur central principies are simple.

86 PART I I CLASSES


Kindle the Light. Through your acts of mercy, symbol, and each fey or fiend within 30 feet of you that
kindness, and forgiveness, kindle the light of hope in the can hear you must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
world, beating back despair. failed save, the creature is turned for 1 minute or until it
takes damage.
Shelter the Light. Where there is good, beauty, love,
and laughter in the world, stand against the wickedness A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move
that would swallow il. Where life fiourishes, stand as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly
against the forces that would render it barren. move to a space within 30 feet of you. lt also can't take
reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action
Preserve Your Own Light. Delight in song and or try to escape fram an effect that prevents it from
laughter, in beauty and arl. If you allow the light to die in moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can use
your own heart, you can't preserve it in the world. the Dodge action.

Be the Light. Be a glorious beacon for ali who live in If the creature's true form is concealed by an illusion,
despair. Let the light of your joy and courage shine forth shapeshifting, or other effect, lhat form is revealed while
in ali your deeds. it is turned.

OATH SPELLS AURA OF WARDING
Vou gain oath spells at the paladin leveIs listed. Beginning at 7th leveI, ancient magic lies so heavily
upon you that it forms an eldritch ward. Vou and friendly
OATH OF THE ANCIENTS SPELLS creatures within 10 feet of you have resistance to
damage from spells.
Paladin Levei Spells
3rd ensnaring strike, speak with animais At 18th leveI, the range of this aura increases to 30 feel.
5th moonbeam, misty step
9th plant growth, protection from energy UNDYING SENTINEL
13th ice storm, stoneskin Starting at 15th leveI, when you are reduced to O hit
17th commune with nature, tree stride points and are not killed oUlright, you can choose to
drop to 1 hit point instead. Once you use this ability, you
CHANNEL DIVINITY can't use it again until you finish a long resl.
When you take this oath at 3rd leveI, you gain the
following two Channel Divinity options. Additionally, you suffer none of the drawbacks of old
age, and you can't be aged magically.
Nature's Wrath. Vou can use your Channel Divinity
to invoke primeval forces to ensnare a foe. As an action, ELDER CHAMPION
you can cause spectral vines to spring up and reach At 20th levei, you can assume the form of an ancient
for a creature within 10 feet ofyou that you can see. force of nature, taking on an appearance you choose.
The creature must succeed on a Strength or Dexterity For example, your skin might turn green or take on a
saving throw (its choice) or be restrained. While bark-like texture, your hair might become leafy or moss-
restrained by the vines, the creature repeats the saving like, or you might sprout antlers or a lion-like mane.
throw at the end of each of its turns. On a success, it
frees itself and the vines vanish. Using your action, you undergo a transformation.
For 1 minute, you gain the following benefits:
Turn the Faithless. Vou can use your Channel
Divinity to utler ancient words that are painful for fey At the start of each ofyour turns, you rega in 10 hit
and fiends to hear. As an action, you present your holy points.
Whenever you cast a paladin spell that has a casting
time of 1 action, you can cast it using a bonus action
instead.
Enemy creatures within 10 feet of you have disadvan-
tage on saving throws against your paladin spells and
Channel Divinity options.

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a long resl.

OATH OF VENGEANCE

The Oath ofVengeance is a solemn commitment to
punish those who have commitled a grievous sino When
evil forces slaughter helpless villagers, when an entire
people turns against the will of the gods. when a thieves'
guild grows toa violent and powerful, when a dragon
rampages through the countryside-at times like these,
paladins arise and swear an Oath of Vengeance to set
right that which has gone wrong. To these paladins-
sometimes called avengers or dark knights-their own
purity is not as important as delivering justice.

PART I I CL~SSES


TENETS OF VENGEANCE CHANNEL DIVINITY
The tenets of the Oath of Vengeanee vary by paladin, but When you take this oath at 3rd leveI, you gain the
ali the tenets revolve around punishing wrongdoers by following two Channel Divinity options.
any means neeessary. Paladins who uphold these tenets
are willing to saerifiee even their own righteousness to Abjure Enemy. As an aetion, you present your holy
mete out justice upon those who do evil, so the paladins symbol and speak a prayer of denunciation, using your
are often neutral or lawful neutral in alignmen!. The ChanneI Divinlty. Choose one ereature within 60 feet
core principIes of the tenets are brutally simple. of you that you ean see. That ereature must make a
Wisdom saving throw, unless it is immune to being
Fight the Greater Evil. Faeed with a ehoice of fighting frightened. Fiends and undead have disadvantage on
my sworn foes or eombating a Iesser evil, I ehoose the this saving throw.
greater evil.
On a failed save, lhe ereature is frightened for I
No Merey for the Wieked. Ordinary foes might win minute or until It takes any damage. While frightened,
my merey, but my sworn enemies do no!. the ereature's speed is O, and It ean't benefit from any
bonus to its speed.
By Any Means Neeessary. My qualms ean't get in the
way of exterminating my foes. On a sueeessful save, the ereature's speed is halved
for I minute or until the ereature takes any damage.
Restitution. ]f my foes wreak ruin on the world, it is
beca use I failed to stop them. I must help those harmed VowofEnmity. As a bonus aetion, you ean utter a vow
by their misdeeds. of enmity against a ereature you ean see within 10 feet
of you, using your Channel Divinity. Vou gain advantage
OATH SPELLS on attaek rolls against lhe ereature for 1 minute or until
VOUgaln oath spells at the paladin leveis listed. it drops to O hit points or falls uneonscious.

OATH OF VENGEANCE SPELLS RELENTLESS AVENGER
By 7th leveI, your supernatural foeus helps you dose
Paladin Levei Spells off a foe's retrea!. When you hit a ereature with an
3rd bane, hunter's mark opportunity attaek, you ean move up to half your
5th hold person, misty step speed immediately after the attaek and as part of
9th haste, protection from energy the same reaetion. This movement doesn't provoke
13th banishment, dimension door opportunityattaeks.
17th hold monster, scrying
Sou L OF VENGEANCE
Starting at 15th leveI, the authority with which you
speak your Vow of Enmity gives you greater power over
your foe. When a ereature under the effeet of your Vow
of Enmity makes an attaek, you ean use your reaetion to
make a melee weapon attaek against that ereature if it is
within range.

AVENGING ANGEL
At 20th leveI, you ean assume the form of an
angelie avenger. Using your aetion, you undergo a
transformation. For I hour, you gain the following
benefits:

Wings sprout from your baek and grant you a fiying
speed of 60 fee!.
Vou emanate an aura of menaee in a 30-foot radius.
The first time any enemy ereature enters the aura or
starts its turn there during a battle, the ereature must
sueeeed on a Wisdom saving throw or beeome fright-
ened of you for I minute or unti! it takes any damage.
Attaek rolls against the frightened ereature have
advantage.

Onee you use this feature, you ean't use it again unti!
you finish a long resto

PA RT 1 I CLASSES
88


RANGER I

Rough and wild looking,
a human stalks alone
thraugh the shadows of
trees, hunting the orcs he
knows are planning a raid
on a nearby farm, Clutching
a shortsword in each hand,
he becomes a whirlwind of
steel, cutting down one enemy
after another.

After tumbling away from a cone of
freezing air, an elf finds her feet and draws
back her bow to loose an arrow aI the white
dragon. Shrugging off the wave of fear that emanates
from the dragon like the cold of its breath, she sends
one arrow after another to find the gaps between the
dragon's thick scales.

Holding his hand high, a half-elf whistles to the hawk
that circles high above him, calling the bird back to his
side. Whispering instructions in Elvish, he points to
the owlbear he's been tracking and sends the hawk to
distract the creature while he readies his bow.

Far fram the bustle of cities and towns, past the
hedges lhat shelter the most distant farms fram the
terrors of the wild, amid lhe dense-packed trees of
trackJess forests and across wide and empty plains,
rangers keep their unending watch.

DEADLY HUNTERS

Warriors of the wilderness, rangers specialize in
hunting the monsters that threaten the edges of
civilization-humanoid raiders, rampaging beasts and
monstrasities, terrible giants, and deadly dragons. They
learn to track their quarry as a predator does, moving
stealthily thraugh the wilds and hiding lhemselves in
brush and rubble. Rangers focus their combat training
on techniques that are particularly useful against their
specific favored foes.

Thanks to their familiarity with the wilds, rangers
acquire the ability to cast spells that harness nature's
power, much as a druid does. Their spells, like their
combat abilities, emphasize speed, stealth, and the hunt.
A ranger's talents and abilities are honed with deadly
focus on the grim task of protecting lhe borderlands.

INDEPENDENT ADVENTURERS

Though a ranger might make a living as a hunter, a
guide, or a tracker, a ranger's true calling is to defend
the outskirts of civilization fram lhe ravages of monsters
and humanoid hordes lhat press in from the wild. In
some places, rangers gather in secretive orders or join
forces with druidic circles. Many rangers, though, are
independent almost to a fault, knowing that, when a
dragon or a band of orcs attacks, a ranger might be lhe
first-and possibly the last-line of defense.

This fierce independence makes rangers well suited
to adventuring, since they are accustomed to life far
fram the comforts of a dry bed and a hot bath. Faced
with city-bred adventurers who grouse and whine about
the hardships of the wild, rangers respond with some

p" Rl I I' SE 89


Levei Proficiency Features Spells -Spell Slots per Spell Level-
1st Bonus Favored Enemy, Natural Explorer Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
2nd +2 Fighting Style, Spellcasting
3rd +2 Ranger Archetype, Primeval Awareness 22
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 33
5th +2 Extra Attack 33
6th +3 Favored Enemy and Natural Explorer improvements 4 42
7th +3 Ranger Archetype feature 4 42
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement, Land's Stride 5 43
9th +3 5 43
10th +4 Natural Explorer improvement, Hide in plain Sight 6 432
11th +4 Ranger Archetype feature 6 432
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 7 433
13th +4 7 433
14th +5 Favored Enemy improvement, Vanish 8 4331
15th +5 Ranger Archetype feature 8 4331
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement 9 4332
17th 9 4332
18th Feral Senses 10 4 3 3 3 1
19th Ability Score Improvement 10 4 3 3 3 1
20th Foe Slayer 11 4 3 3 3 2
11 4 3 3 3 2

mixture of amusement, frustration, and compassion. What made you join up with a band of adventurers?
But they quickly learn that other adventurers who can Do you find it challenging to teach new allies the ways
carry their own weight in a fight against civilization's of the wild, or do you welcome lhe relief from solitude
foes are worth any extra burden. Coddled city folk might that they offer?
not know how to feed themselves or find fresh water in
the wild, but they make up for it in other ways. QUICK BUILD

CREATING A RANGER Vou can make a ranger quickly by following these
suggestions. First, make Dexterity your highest ability
As you create your ranger character, consider the nature score, followed by Wisdom. (Some rangers who focus
of the training that gave you your particular capabilities. on two-weapon fighting make Strength higher than
Did you train with a single mentor, wandering lhe wilds Dexterity.) Second, choose the outlander background.
together until you mastered the ranger's ways? Did you
leave your apprenticeship, or was your mentor slain- CLASS FEATURES
perhaps by the same kind of monster that became your
favored enemy? Or perhaps you learned your skills as As a ranger, you gain the following class features.
part of a band of rangers affiliated with a druidic circle,
trained in mystic paths as well as wilderness lore. Vou HIT POINTS
might be self-taught, a recluse who learned combat
skills, tracking, and even a magical connection to nature Hit Dice: 1dlO per ranger levei
through the necessity of surviving in the wilds. Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 10 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ldl0 (or 6) + your
What's the source of your particular hatred of a
certain kind of enemy? Did a monster kill someone Constitution modifier per ranger levei after 1st
you loved or destroy your home village? Or did you see
toa much of lhe destruction these monsters cause and PROFICIENCIES
commit yourself to reining in their depredations? [s
your adventuring career a continuation of your work Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
in protecting the borderlands, or a significant change? Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None

Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Skills: Choose three from Animal Handling,

Athletics, Insight, [nvestigation, Nature, Perception,
Stealth, and Survival

EQUIPMENT

Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:

PART 1 I CLASSES
90


(a) scalemail or (b) leather armor ARCHERY
(a) two shortswords or (b) two sim pie melee weapons Vou gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with
(a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack ranged weapons.
A longbow and a quiver of 20 arrows
DEFENSE
FAVORED ENEMY While you are wearing armor, you gain a +I bonus to AC.

Beginning at 1st levei, you have significant experience DUELING
studying, tracking, hunting, and even talking to a certain When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and
type of enemy. no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls
with that weapon.
Choose a type of favored enemy: aberrations,
beasts, celestiais, constructs, dragons, elementals, fey, TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING
fiends, giants, monstrosities, oozes, plants, or undead. When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add
Alternatively, you can select two races of humanoid your ability modifier to the damage of the second attack.
(such as gnolls and orcs) as favored enemies.
SPELLCASTING
Vou have advantage on Wisdom (Survival) checks to
track your favored enemies, as well as on Intelligence By the time you reach 2nd levei, you have learned to
checks to recall information about them. use the magical essence of nature to cast spells, much
as a druid does. See chapter 10 for the general rules of
When you gain this feature, you also learn one spellcasting and chapter 11 for the ranger spell Iist.
language of your choice that is spoken by your favored
enemies, if they speak one at alI. SPELL SLOTS
The Ranger table shows how many spell slots you have
Vou choose one additional favored enemy, as well as to cast your spells of 1st leveI and higher. To cast one of
an associated language, at 6th and 14th leveI. As you these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's leveI
gain leveis, your choices should reflect the types of or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
monsters you have encountered on your adventures. finish a long rest.

NATURAL EXPLORER For example, if you know the 1st-levei spell animal
friendship and have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-leveI spell slot
Vou are particularly familiar with one type of natural available, you can cast animal friendship using either slot.
environment and are adept at traveling and surviving in
such regions. Choose one type of favored terrain: arctic, SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVE L AND HIGHER
coast, desert, forest, grassland, mountain, swamp, Vou know two 1st-levei spells ofyour choice from the
or the Underdark. When you make an Intelligence or ranger spelllist.
Wisdom check related to your favored terrain, your
proficiency bonus is doubled if you are using a skill that The Spells Known column of the Ranger table shows
you're proficient in. when you learn more ranger spells of your choice. Each
of these spells must be of a levei for which you have
While traveling for an hour or more in your favored
terrain, you gain the following benefits:

Difticult terrain doesn't slow your group's traveI.
Your group can't become lost except by magical
means.
Even when you are engaged in another activity while
traveling (such as foraging, navigating, or tracking),
you remain alert to danger.
If you are traveling alone, you can move stealthily at
a normal pace.
When you forage, you find twice as much food as you
normally would.
While tracking other creatures, you also learn their
exact number, their sizes, and how long ago they
passed through the area.

Vou choose additional favored terra in types aI 6th
and 10th leveI.

FIGHTING STYLE

At 2nd levei, you adopt a particular style of fighting as
your specialty. Choose one of the following options.
Vou can't take a Fighting Style option more than once,
even if you later get to choose again.

9'


spell slots. For instance, when you reach 5th levei in this ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
c1ass, you can learn one new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI.
When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass, and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score of your
you can choose one of the ranger spells you know choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
and replace it with another spell from the ranger your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
spelllist, which also must be of a leveI for which you score above 20 using this feature.
have spell slots.
EXTRA ATTACK
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your ranger Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
spells, since your magic draws on your attunement to once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno
nature. Vou use your Wisdom whenever a spell refers
to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your LAND'S STRIDE
Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw De for
a ranger spell you cast and when making an attack roll Starting at 8th leveI, moving through nonmagical
with one. difficult terra in costs you no extra movement. Vou can
also pass through nonmagical plants without being
Spell save De ~ 8 + your proficiency bonus + slowed by them and without taking damage from them if
they have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard.
your Wisdom modifier
In addition, you have advantage on saving throws
Spell altack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus + against plants that are magically created or manipulated
your Wisdom modifier to impede movement, such those created by the
entangle spell.
RANGER ARCHETYPE
HIDE IN PLAIN SIGHT
At 3rd leveI, you choose an archetype that you strive
to emulate: Hunter or Beast Master, both detailed at Starting at 10th leveI, you can spend 1 minute creating
the end of the c1ass description. Your choice grants camouflage for yourself. Vou must have access to fresh
you features at 3rd levei and again at 7th, 11th, mud, dirt. plants. soot. and other naturally occurring
and 15th leveI. materiaIs with which to create your camouflage.

PRIMEVAL AWARENESS Once you are camouflaged in this way, you can try
to hide by pressing yourself up against a solid surface,
Beginning at 3rd levei, you can use your action and such as a tree or wall, that is at least as tall and wide
expend one ranger spell slot to focus your awareness on as you are. Vou gain a +10 bonus to Dexterity (Stealth)
the region around you. For 1 minute per leveI of the spell checks as long as you remain there without moving or
slot you expend, you can sense whether the following taking actions. Once you move or take an action or a
types of creatures are present within 1 mile of you (or reaction, you must camouflage yourself again to gain
within up to 6 miles if you are in your favored terra in): this benefit.
aberrations, celestiais, dragons, elementals, fey, fiends,
and undead. This feature doesn't reveal the creatures' VANISH
location or number.
Starting at 14th levei, you can use the Hide action as a
bonus action on your turno AIso, you can't be tracked by
nonmagical means, unless you choose to leave a trail.

FERAL SENSES

At 18th levei, you gain preternatural senses that help
you fight creatures you can't see. When you attack a
creature you can't see, your inability to see it doesn't
impose disadvantage on your attack rolls against il.

Vou are also aware of the location of any invisible
creature within 30 feet of you, provided that the
creature isn't hidden from you and you aren't
blinded or deafened.

FOE SLAYER

At 20th levei, you become an unparalleled hunter of your
enemies. Once on each of your turns, you can add your
Wisdom modifier to the attack roll or the damage roll of
an attack you make against one of your favored enemies.
Vou can choose to use this feature before or after the
roll, but before any effects of the roll are applied.


RANGER ARCHETYPES if you succeed on the saving throw, and only half
damage if you fai!'
The ideal of the ranger has two classic expressions: the
Hunter and the Beast Master. Stand Against the Tide. When a hostile creature
misses you with a mele e attack, you can use your reaction
HUNTER to force that creature to repeat the same attack against
another creature (other than itself) of your choice.
Emulating the Hunter archetype means accepting your
place as a bulwark between civilization and the terrors Uncanny Dodge. When an attacker that you can see
of the wilderness. As you walk the Hunter's path, you hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to
learn specialized techniques for fighting the threats halve the attack's damage against you.
you face, from rampaging ogres and hordes of ores to
towering giants and terrifying dragons. BEAST MASTER

HUNTER'S PREY The Beast Master archetype embodies a friendship
At 3rd levei, you gain one of the following features between the civilized races and the beasts of the world.
of your choice. United in focus, beast and ranger work as one to fight
the monstrous foes that threaten civilization and the
C%ssus S/ayer. Your tenacity can wear down wilderness alike. Emulating the Beast Master archetype
the most potent foes. When you hit a creature with a means committing yourself to this ideal, working in
weapon attack, the creature takes an extra ld8 damage partnership with all animal as its companion and friend.
if it's below its hit point maximum. Vou can deal this
extra damage only once per turno RANGER'S COMPANION
At 3rd levei, you gain a beast companion that
Giant Ki//er. When a Large or larger creature within accompanies you on your adventures and is trained to
5 feet of you hits or misses you with an attack, you can fight alongside you. Choose a beast that is no larger than
use your reaction to attack that creature immediately Medium and that has a chaIlenge rating of 1/4 or lower
after its attack, provided that you can see the creature. (appendix O presellts statistics for the hawk, mastiff,
and panther as examples). Add your proficiency bonus
Horde Breaker. Once on each of your turns when you to the beast's AC, attack roIls, and damage rolls, as weIl
make a weapon attack, you can make another attack as to any saving throws and skills it is proficient in. Its
with the same weapon against a different creature that hit poinl maximum equals its normal maximum or four
is within 5 feet of the original target and within range times your ranger leveI, whichever is higher.
of your weapon.
The beast obeys your commands as best as it cano It
DEFENSIVE TACTICS takes its turn on your initiative, though it doesn't take an
At 7th leveI, you gain one of the foIlowing features action unless you command it to. On your turn, you can
of your choice. verbally command the beast where to move (no action
required by you). Vou can use your action to verbally
Escape the Horde. Opportunity attacks against you command it to take the Attack, Dash, Disengage, Dodge,
are made with disadvantage. or Help action. Once you have the Extra Attack feature,
you can make one weapon attack yourself when you
Mu/tiattack Defense. When a creature hits you command the beast to take the Attack action.
with an attack, you gain a +4 bonus to AC against
ali subsequent attacks made by that creature for the While traveling through your favored terrain with only
rest of the turno the beast, you can move stealthily at a normal pace.

Stee/ Wi//. Vou have advantage on saving throws lf the beast dies, you can obtain another one by
against being frightened. spending 8 hours magicaIly bonding with another beast
that isn't hostile to you, either the same type of beast as
MULTIATTACK before or a different one.
At 11th levei, you gain one of the following features
of your choice. EXCEPTIONAL TRAINING
Beginning at 7th levei, on any of your turns when
Vo//ey. Vou can use your action to make a ranged your beast companion doesn't attack, you can use a
attack against any number of creatures within 10 feet bonus action to command the beast to take the Dash,
of a point you can see within your weapon's range. Vou Disengage, Dodge, or Help action on its turno
must have ammunition for each target, as normal, and
you make a separate attack roll for each target. BESTIAL FURY
Starting at 11th leveI, your beast companion can
Whir/wind Attack. Vou can use your action to make a make two attacks when you command it to use the
melee attack against any number of creatures within 5 Attack action.
feet of you, with a separate attack roIl for each target.
SHARE SPELLS
SUPERIOR HUNTER'S DEFENSE Beginning at 15th levei, when you cast a spell targeting
At 15th levei, you gain one of the following features yourself, you can also affect your beast companion with
of your choice. the spell if the beast is within 30 feet of YOU.

Evasion. Vou can nimbly dodge out of the way of PART I I CL~SSES
certa in area effects, such as a red dragon's fiery breath
or a lightning bolt spel!. When you are subjected to an
effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw
to take only half damage, you instead take no damage

93


ROGUE

Signaling for her companions to wait, a halfling creeps
forward through the dungeon hall. She presses an ear
to the door, then pulls out a set of tools and picks the
lock in the blink of an eye. Then she disappears into
the shadows as her fighter friend moves forward to kick
the door open.

A human lurks in the shadows of an alley while his
accomplice prepares for her part in the ambush. When
their target-a notorious slaver-passes the alleyway,
the accomplice cries out, the slaver comes to investigate,
and the assassin's blade cuts his throat before he can
make a sound.

Suppressing a giggle, a gnome waggles her fingers
and magically lifts the key ring from the guard's belt.
In a moment, the keys are in her hand, the cell door is
open, and she and her companions are free to make
their escape.

Rogues rely on skill, stealth, and their foes'
vulnerabilities to get the upper hand in any situation.
They have a knack for finding the solution to just about
any problem, demonstrating a resourcefulness and
versatility that is the cornerstone of any successful
adventuring party.

SKILL AND PRECISION

Rogues devote as much effort to mastering the use of
a variety of skills as they do to perfecting their combat
abilities, giving them a broad expertise that few other
characters can match. Many rogues focus on stealth and
deception, while others refine the skills that help them
in a dungeon environment, such as climbing, finding and
disarming traps, and opening locks.

When it comes to combat, rogues prioritize cunning
over brute strength. A rogue would rather make one
precise strike, placing it exactly where the attack will
hurt the target most, than wear an opponent down
with a barrage of attacks. Rogues have an almost
supernatural knack for avoiding danger, and a few learn
magical tricks to supplement their other abilities.

A SHADY LIVING

Every town and city has its share of rogues. Most of
them live up to the worst stereotypes of the class,
making a living as burglars, assassins, cutpurses, and
con artists. Often, these scoundrels are organized
into thieves' guilds or crime families. Plenty of rogues
operate independently, but even they sometimes
recruit apprentices to help them in their scams
and heists. A few rogues make an honest living as

PART 1 I CLASSES
9+


THE ROGUE

Proficiency Sneak
levei Bonus Attack Features

1st +2 1d6 Expertise, Sneak Attack,

Thieves' Cant

2nd +2 1d6 Cunning Action

3rd +2 2d6 RoguishArchetype

4th +2 2d6 AbilityScore Improvement

5th +3 3d6 Uncanny Dodge

6th +3 3d6 Experlise

7th +3 4d6 Evasion

8th +3 4d6 AbilityScore Improvement

9th +4 5d6 RoguishArchetype feature

10th +4 5d6 AbilityScore Improvemenl

11th +4 6d6 ReliableTalent

12th +4 6d6 AbilityScore Improvement

13th +5 7d6 RoguishArchetype feature

14th +5 7d6 Blindsense

15th +5 8d6 Slippery Mind

16th +5 8d6 AbilityScore Improvement

17th +6 9d6 RoguishArchetype fealure

18th +6 9d6 Elusive

19th +6 10d6 AbilityScore Improvement

20th +6 10d6 Stroke of luck

locksmilhs, invesligalors, or exlerminalors, which can QUICK BUILD
be a dangerous job in a world where dire rals-and You can make a rogue quickly by following
wererals-haunt lhe sewers. these suggestions. First. Dexterity should
be your highest ability score. Make
As adventurers, rogues fali on both sides of lhe law. Intelligence your next-highest if you want to
Some are hardened criminais who decide lo seek excel at Investigation or plan to take up the
lheir forlune in lreasure hoards, while olhers lake up Arcane Trickster archetype. Choose Charisma
a tife of advenlure to escape from lhe law. Some have instead if you plan to emphasize deception and soeial
learned and perfecled lheir skills wilh lhe exptieit interaction. Second, choose the charlatan background.
purpose of infillrating aneient ruins and hidden crypts
in search of treasure. CLASS FEATURES

CREATING A ROGUE As a rogue, you have the following cIass features.

As you create your rogue character, consider the HIT POINTS
character's relationship to the law. Do you have a Hil Diee: 1dS per rogue levei
criminal past-or present? Are you on the run from the Hil Poinls aI Is1 Levei: S + your Constitution modifier
law or from an angry thieves' guild master? Or did you Hil Poinls aI Higher LeveIs: 1dS (or 5) + your
leave your guild in search of bigger risks and bigger
rewards? Is it greed that drives you in your adventures. Constitution modifier per rogue levei after 1st
or some other desire or ideal?
PROFIClENCIES
What was the trigger that led you away from your Armor: Light armor
previous life? Did a great con or heist gone terribly Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows,
wrong cause you to reevaluate your career? Maybe
you were lucky and a successful robbery gave you the longsworels, rapiers, shortswords
coin you needed to escape the squalor ofyour !ife. Tools: Thieves' tools
Did wanderlust finally call you away from your home?
Perhaps you suddenly found yourself cut off from your Saving Throws: Dexterity, Intelligence
family or your mentor, and you had to find a new means Skills: Choose four from Acrobatics, Athletics,
of support. Or maybe you made a new friend-another
member of your aelventuring party-who showeel you Deception, Insight, Intimidation, Investigation,
new possibilities for earning a tiving anel employing Perception, Pcrformance, Persuasion. Sleight of
your particular talents. Hanel, anel Stealth

PART 1 CLASSES 95


EQUIPMENT people in an area are easy marks or will provide a safe
house for thieves on the run.
You start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background: CUNNING ACTION

(a) a rapier or (b) a shortsword Starting at 2nd levei, your quick thinking and agility
(a) a shortbow and quiver of 20 arrows or (b) a allow you to move and act quickly. You can take a
shortsword bonus action on each of your turns in combat. This
(a) a burglar's pack, (b) a dungeoneer's pack, or (c) an action can be used only to take the Dash, Disengage,
explorer's pack or Hide action.
Leather armor, two daggers, and thieves' tools
ROGUISH ARCHETYPE
EXPERTISE
At 3rd leveI, you choose an archetype that you emulate
At 1st leveI, choose two ofyour skill proficiencies, or in the exercise of your rogue abilities: Thief, Assassin,
one of your skill proficiencies and your proficiency with or Arcane Trickster, ali detailed at the end of the class
thieves' tooIs. Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any description. Your archetype choice grants you features
ability check you make that uses either of the chosen at 3rd levei and then again at 9th, 13th, and 17th leve!.
proficiencies.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
At 6th levei, you can choose two more of your
proficiencies (in skills or with thieves' tools) to gain When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 10th, 12th,
this benefit. 16th, and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score
of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability
SNEAK ATTACK scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase
an ability score above 20 using this feature.
Beginning at 1st levei, you know how to strike subtly
and exploit a foe's distraction. Once per turn, you can UNCANNY DODGE
deal an extra Id6 damage to one creature you hit with
an attack if you have advantage on the attack rol!. The Starting at 5th levei, when an attacker that you can see
attack must use a finesse or a ranged weapon. hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to
halve the attack's damage against you.
You don't need advantage on the attack roll if another
enemy of the target is within 5 feet of it, that enemy EVASION
isn't incapacitated, and you don't have disadvantage on Beginning at 7th levei, you can nimbly dodge out of the
the attack rol!. way of certain area effects, such as a red dragon's fiery
breath or an ice storm spell. When you are subjected
The amount of the extra damage increases as you to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving
gain leveis in this class, as shown in the Sneak Attack throw to take only half damage, you instead take no
column of the Rogue table. damage if you succeed on the saving throw, and only
half damage if you fai!'
THIEVES' CANT
RELIABLE T ALENT
During your rogue training you learned thieves' cant, a
secret mix of dialect, jargon, and code that allows you to By 11th levei, you have refined your chosen skills until
hide messages in seemingly normal conversation. Only they approach perfection. Whenever you make an ability
another creature that knows thieves' cant understands check that lets you add your proficiency bonus, you can
such messages. lt takes four times longer to convey sue h treat a d20 roll of 9 or lower as a 10.
a message than it does to speak the same idea plainly.
BLINDSENSE
In addition, you understand a set of secret signs and
symbols used to convey short, simple messages, such Starting at 14th levei, ifyou are able to hear, you are
as whether an area is dangerous or the territory of a aware of the location of any hidden or invisible creature
thieves' guild, whether loot is nearby, or whether the within lO feet ofyou.

SLIPPERY MIND

By 15th leveI, you have acquired greater mental
strength. You gain proficiency in Wisdom saving throws.

ELUSIVE

Beginning at 18th levei, you are so evasive that
attackers rarely gain the upper hand against you. No
attack roll has advantage against you while you aren't
incapacitated.

PART I I CLASSES
96


STROKE OF LUCK second turn at your initiative minus 10. Vou can't use
this feature when you are surprised.
At 20th leveI, you have an uncanny knack for succeeding
when you need to. If your attack misses a target within ASSASSIN
range, you can turn the miss into a hit. Alternatively, if
you fail an ability check, you can treat the d20 roll as a 20. Vou focus your training on the grim art of death. Those
who adhere to this archetype are diverse: hired killers,
.Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until spies, bounty hunters, and even specially anointed
you finish a short or long resto priests trained to exterminate the enemies of their deity.
Stealth, poison, and disguise help you eliminate your
ROGUISH ARCHETYPES foes with deadly efficiency.

Rogues have many features in common, including their BONUS PROFICIENCIES
emphasis on perfecting their skills, their precise and When you choose this archetype at 3rd levei, you gain
deadly approach to combat, and their increasingly quick proficiency with the disguise kit and the poisoner's kit.
reflexes. But different rogues steer those talents in
varying directions, embodied by the rogue archetypes. ASSASSINATE
Vour choice of archetype is a reflection of your focus- Starting at 3rd levei, you are at your deadliest when you
not necessarily an indication of your chosen profession, get the drop on your enemies. Vou have advantage on
but a description of your preferred techniques. attack rolls against any creature that hasn't taken a turn
in the combat yet. In addition, any hit you score against
THIEF a creature that is surprised is a criticai hit.

Vou hone your skills in the larcenous arts. Burglars, INFILTRATION EXPERTISE
bandits, cutpurses, and other criminais typically follow Starting at 9th leveI, you can unfailingly create false
this archetype, but so do rogues who prefer to think of identities for yourself. Vou must spend seven days and
themselves as professional treasure seekers, explorers, 25 gp to establish the history, profession, and affiliations
delvers, and investigators. In addition to improving your for an identity. Vou can't establish an identity that
agility and stealth, you learn skills useful for delving into belongs to someone else. For example, you might acquire
ancient ruins, reading unfamiliar languages, and using appropriate clothing, letters of introduction, and official-
magic items you normally couldn't employ. looking certification to establish yourself as a member of
a trading house from a remote city so you can insinuate
FAST HANDS yourself into the company of other wealthy merchants.
Starting at 3rd leveI, you can use the bonus action
granted by your Cunning Action to make a Dexterity Thereafter, if you adopt the new identity as a disguise,
(Sleight of Hand) check, use your thieves' tools to other creatures believe you to be that person until given
disarm a trap or open a lock, or take the Use an an obvious reason not to.
Object action.
IMPOSTOR
SECOND-STORY WORK At 13th leveI, you gain the ability to unerringly mimic
When you choose this archetype at 3rd levei, you gain another person's speech, writing, and behavior.
the ability to climb faster than normal; climbing no Vou must spend at least three hours studying
longer costs you extra movement. these three components of the person's behavior,
listening to speech, examining handwriting, and
In addition, when you make a runningjump, the observing mannerisms.
distance you cover increases by a number of feet equal
to your Dexterity modifier. IrVour ruse is indiscernible to the casual observer. a

SUPREME SNEAK wary creature suspects something is amiss, you have
Starting at 9th levei, you have advantage on a Dexterity advantage on any Charisma (Deception) check you make
(Stealth) check if you move no more than half your to avoid detection.
speed on the same turn.
DEATH STRIKE
USE MAGIC DEVICE Starting at 17th leveI, you become a master of instant
By 13th leveI, you have learned enough about the death. When you attack and hit a creature that is
workings of magic that you can improvise the use of surprised, it must make a Constitution saving throw
items even when they are not intended for YOU. Vou (DC 8 + your Dexterity modifier + your proficiency
ignore ali class, race, and levei requirements on the use bonus). On a failed save, double the damage of your
of magic items. attack against the creature.

THIEF'S REFLEXES ARCANE TRICKSTER
When you reach 17th levei, you have become adept at
laying ambushes and quickly escaping danger. Vou can Some rogues enhance their fine-honed skills of stealth
take two turns during the first round of any combat. Vou and agility with magic, learning tricks of enchantment
take your first turn at your normal initiative and your and illusion. These rogues include pickpockets and
burglars, but also pranksters, mischief-makers, and a
significant number of adventurers.

PART 1 CLASSES 9i


SPELLCASTING ARCANE TRICKSTER SPELLCASTINC
When you reach 3rd levei, you gain the ability to
cast spells. See chapter 10 for the general rules of Rogue Cantrips Spells -Spell Slots per Spell Level-
spellcasting and chapter 1i for the wizard spelllisl. Levei Known
3rd Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Cantrips. Vou learn three cantrips: mage hand and 4th 3 2
two other cantrips of your choice fram the wizard spell 5th 3 4 3
lisl. Vou learn another wizard cantrip of your choice 6th 3 4 3
at 10th leveI. 7th 3 4 3
8th 3 5 42
Spel1 S/ots. The Arcane Trickster Spellcasting 9th 3 6 42
table shows how many spell slots you have to cast 10th 3 6 42
your spells of 1st levei and higher. To cast one of these 11th 3 7 43
spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's leveI or 12th 4 8 43
higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you 13th 4 8 43
finish a long rest. 14th 4 9 432
15th 4 10 432
For example. ifyou know the Ist.level spell charm 16th 4 10 432
person and have a Ist.level and a 2nd.level spell slot 17th 4 11 433
available, you can cast charm person using either slol. 18th 4 11 433
19th 4 11 4 33
Spel1s Known of 1st.Level and Higher. Vou know 20th 4 12 433
three I st.level wizard spells of your choice, two of which 4 13 433
you must choose from the enchantment and iIIusion 4
spells on the wizard spell lisl.
Vou can perform one of these tasks without being
The Spells Known column of the Arcane Trickster noticed by a creature if you succeed on a Dexterity
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard (Sleight of Hand) check contested by the creature's
spells of 1st levei ar higher. Each of these spells must Wisdom (Perception) check.
be an enchantment or illusion spell of your choice, and
must be of a levei for which you have spell slots. For In addition, you can use the bonus action granted by
instance, when you reach 7th levei in this c1ass. you can your Cunning Action to contralthe hand.
learn one new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI.
MAGICAL AMBUSH
The spells you learn at 8th. 14th, and 20th levei can Starting at 9th levei, if you are hidden from a
come fram any school of magic. creature when you cast a spell on it, the creature has
disadvantage on any saving throw it makes againstthe
Whenever you gain a levei in this c1ass, you can spellthis turno
replace one of the wizard spells you know with another
spell of your choice from the wizard spell lisl. The VERSATILE TRICKSTER
new spell must be of a levei for which you have spell At 13th leveI, you gain the ability to distracttargets with
slots. and it must be an enchantment or illusion spell, your mage hand. As a bonus action on your turn, you can
unless you're replacing the spell you gained at 8th, 14th, designate a creature within 5 feet of the spectral hand
ar 20th leveI. created by the spell. Doing so gives you advantage on
allack ralls against that creature untilthe end of the turno
Spel1casting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting
ability for your wizard spells, since you learn your SPELL THIEF
spells thraugh dedicated study and memorization. At 17th levei, you gain the ability to magically
Vou use your lntelligence whenever a spell refers to stealthe knowledge of how to cast a spell fram
your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your another spellcaster.
Intelligence modifier when setting the saving thraw
DC for a wizard spell you cast and when making an Immediately after a creature casts a spellthattargets
allack rall with one. you ar includes you in its area of effect, you can use your
reaction to force the creature to make a saving thraw
Spell save De ~ 8 + your proficiency bonus + with its spellcasting ability modifier. The DC equals
your spell save De. On a failed save, you negate the
your Intelligence modifier spell's effect against you, and you stealthe knowledge
of the spell if it is at least 1st leveI and of a levei you can
Spell altack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus + cast (it doesn't need to be a wizard spell). For the next
8 hours, you know the spell and can cast it using your
your Intelligence modifier spell slolS. The crealure can't casl lhat spell untilthe
8 hours have passed.
MACE HAND LEGERDEMAIN
Starting at 3rd levei, when you cast mage hand, you can Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
make the spectral hand invisible. and you can perform you finish a long resl.
the following additionaltasks with it:

Vou can stow one objectthe hand is holding in a
container worn ar carried by another creature.
Vou can retrieve an object in a container worn or
carried by another creature.
Vou can use thieves' tools to pick locks and disarm
traps at range.

PA RT 1 CLASSES

98


SORCERER

Golden eyes flashing, a human
stretches out her hand and unleashes
the dragonfire that burns in her veins.
As an inferno rages around her foes,
leathery wings spread from her back and
she takes to the air.

Long hair whipped bya conjured wind,
a half.elf spreads his arms wide and throws
his head back. Lifting him momentarily off
the ground. a wave of magic surges up in him,
through him, and out from him in a mighty blast
of lightning.

Crouching behind a stalagmite, a halfling points a
finger at a charging troglodyte. A blast of fire springs
from her finger to strike the creature. She ducks back
behind the rock formation with a grin, unaware that her
wild magic has turned her skin bright blue.

Sorcerers carry a magical birthright conferred
upon them by an exotic bloodline, some otherworldly
influence. or exposure to unknown cosmic forces.
One can't study sorcery as one learns a language, any
more than one can learn to live a legendary life. No one
chooses sorcery; the power chooses the sorcerer.

RAW MAGIe

Magic is a part of every sorcerer. suffusing body, mind,
and spirit with a latent power that waits to be tapped.
Some sorcerers wield magic that springs from an
ancient bloodline infused with the magic of dragons.
Others carry a raw, uncontrolled magic within them,
a chaotic storm that manifests in unexpected ways.

The appearance of sorcerous powers is wildly
unpredictable. Some draconic bloodlines produce
exactly one sorcerer in every generation, but in other
lines of descent every individual is a sorcerer. Most
of the time, the talents of sorcery appear as apparent
flukes. Some sorcerers can't name the origin of their
power, while others trace it to strange events in their
own lives. The touch of a demon, the blessing of a
dryad at a baby's birth, or ataste of the water from
a mysterious spring might spark the gift of sorcery.
So toa might the gift of a deity of magic, exposure
to the elemental forces of the [nner Planes or the
maddening chaos of Limbo, or a glimpse into the
inner workings of reality.

Sorcerers have no use for the spellbooks and ancient
tomes of magic lore that wizards rely on. nor do they
rely on a patron to grant their spells as warlocks do.
By learning to harness and channel their own inborn
magic, they can discover new and staggering ways
to unleash that power.

UNEXPLAINED POWERS

Sorcerers are rare in the world, and it's unusual to find
a sorcerer who is not involved in the adventuring life
in some way. People with magical power seething in
their veins soon discover that the power doesn't like to
stay quiet. A sorcerer's magic wants to be wielded. and
it has a tendency to spill out in unpredictable ways if
it isn't called on.

PART I n ~SSFS
Proficiency Sorcery Cantrips Spells -Spell Slots per Spell Level-
Bonus Points Features
Known Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th

1st +2 spellcasting,sorcerous 4 22

Origin

2nd +2 2 Font of Magic 4 33

3rd +2 3 Metamagic 4 4 42

4th +2 4 Abilityscore Improvement 5 5 43

5th +3 5 5 6 432

6th +3 6 sorcerous Origin feature 5 7 433

7th +3 7 5 8 4331

8th +3 8 AbilityScore Improvement 5 9 4332

9th +4 9 5 10 4 3 3 3 1

10th +4 10 Metamagic 6 11 4 3 3 3 2

11th +4 11 6 12 4 3 3 3 2 1

12th +4 12 AbilityScore Improvement 6 12 4 3 3 3 2 1

13th +5 13 6 13 4 3 3 3 2 1 1

14th +5 14 sorcerous Origin feature 6 13 4 3 3 3 2 1 1

15th +5 15 6 14 4 3 3 3 2 1 1

16th +5 16 AbilityScore Improvement 6 14 4 3 3 3 2 1 1

17th +6 17 Metamagic 6 15 4 3 3 3 2 1 1

18th +6 18 sorcerous Origin feature 6 15 4 3 3 3 3 1 1

19th +6 19 Abilityscore Improvement 6 15 4 3 3 3 3 2 1

20th +6 20 Sorcerous Restoration 6 15 4 3 3 3 3 2 2

Sorcerers often links you to a powerful individual in the world-the fey
have obscure or quixotic creature that blessed you at birth, the dragon who put
motivations driving them a drop of its blood into your veins, the lich who created
to adventure. Some seek a greater you as an experiment, or the deity who chose you to
understanding of the magical force that infuses carry this power.
them, or the answer to the mystery of its origino Others
hope to find a way to get rid of it, or to unleash its full QUICK BUILD
potential. Whatever their goals, sorcerers are every bit Vou can make a sorcerer quickly by following these
as useful to an adventuring party as wizards, making suggestions. First, Charisma should be your highest
up for a compara tive lack of breadth in their magical ability score, followed by Constitution. Second,
knowledge with enormous flexibility in using the choose the hermit background. Third, choose the
spells they know, light, prestidigitation, ray of frost, and shocking grasp
cantrips, along with the 1st-levei spells shield and
CREATING A SORCERER magic missile.

The most important question to consider when creating CLASS FEATURES
your sorcerer is the origin of your power. As a starting
character, you'lI choose an origin that ties to a draconic As a sorcerer, you gain the following c1ass features.
bloodline or the influence of wild magic, but the exact
source of your power is up to you to decide. Is it a family HIT POINTS
curse, passed down to you from distant ancestors? ar Hit Dice: Id6 per sorcerer levei
did some extraordinary event leave you blessed with Hit Points at 1st Levei: 6 + your Constitution modifier
inherent magic but perhaps scarred as well? Hit Points at Higher Leveis: Id6 (or 4) + your

How do you feel about the magical power coursing Constitution modifier per sorcerer leveI after 1st
through you? Do you embrace it, try to master it, or
revel in its unpredictable nature? Is it a blessing or PROFICIENCIES
a curse? Did you seek it out, or did it find you? Did Armar: Nane
you have the option to refuse it, and do you wish you Weapons: Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs,
had? What do you intend to do with it? Perhaps you
feellike you've been given this power for some lofty light crossbows
purpose. ar you might decide that the power gives you Tools: None
the right to do what you want, to take what you want
from those who lack such power, Perhaps your power Saving Throws: Constitution, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Deception, Insight,

Intimidation, Persuasion, and Religion

PART I I CLASSES

100


EQUIPMENT SPELLCASTING Focus
Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to Vou can use an arcane focus (found in chapter 5) as a
the equipment granted by your background: spellcasting focus for your sorcerer spells.

(a) a light crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) any simple SORCEROUS ORIGIN
weapon
(a) a component pouch or (b) an arcane focus Choose a sorcerous origin, which describes the
(a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack source of your innate magical power: Draconic
Two daggers Bloodline or Wild Magic, both detailed at the end of the
c1ass description.
SPELLCASTING
Your choice grants you features when you choose it at
An event in your past, or in the life of a parent or 1st leveI and again at 6th, 14th, and 18th leveI.
ancestor, left an indelible mark on you, infusing you with
arcane magic. This font of magic, whatever its origin, FONT OF MAGIC
fuels your spells. See chapter 10 for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the sorcerer spelllist. At 2nd levei, you tap into a deep wellspring of magic
within yourself. This wellspring is represented by
CANTRIPS sorcery points, which allow you to create a variety of
At 1st leveI, you know four cantrips of your choice from magical effects.
the sorcerer spelllist. Vou learn additional sorcerer
cantrips of your choice at higher leveis, as shown in the SORCERY POINTS
Cantrips Known column of the Sorcerer table. Vou have 2 sorcery points, and you gain more as you
reach higher leveis. as shown in the Sorcery Points
SPELL SLOTS column of the Sorcerer table. You can never have
The Sorcerer table shows how many spell slots you more sorcery points than shown on the table for your
have to cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. To cast leveI. Vou regain ali spent sorcery points when you
one of these sorcerer spells, you must expend a slot of finish a long rest.
the spell's levei or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell
slots when you finish a long rest. FLEXIBLE CASTING
Vou can use your sorcery points to gain additional spell
For example, if you know the 1st-levei spell burning slots. or sacrifice spell slots to gain additional sorcery
hands and have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-levei spell slot points. Vou learn other ways to use your sorcery points
available, you can cast burning hands using either slot. as you reach higher leveis.

SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND HWHER Creating Spel1 S/ots. Vou can transform unexpended
Vou know two 1st-levei spells of your choice from the sorcery points into one spell slot as a bonus action on
sorcerer spelllist. your turno The Creating Spell Slots table shows the cost
of creating a spell slot of a given leveI. Vou can create
The Spells Known column of the Sorcerer table spell slots no higher in leveI than 5th.
shows when you learn more sorcerer spells of your
choice. Each of these spells must be of a levei for which CREATlNC SPELL SLOTS
you have spell slots. For instance, when you reach 3rd
levei in this c1ass, you can learn one new spell of 1st Spell Slot Sorcery
or 2nd leveI. Levei Point Cost

Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass, 1st 2
you can choose one of the sorcerer spells you know 2nd 3
and replace it with another spell from the sorcerer 3rd 5
spelllist, which also must be of a levei for which you 4th 6
have spell slots. 5th 7

SPELLCASTING ABILITY Converting a Spel1 S/ot to Sorcery Points. As a
Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your sorcerer bonus action on your turn, you can expend one spell
spells, since the power of your magic relies on your slot and gain a number of sorcery points equal to the
ability to project your will into the world. Vou use your slot's leveI.
Charisma whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting
ability. In addition. you use your Charisma modifier METAMAGIC
when setting the saving throw DC for a sorcerer spell
you cast and when making an attack roll with one. At 3rd levei, you gain the ability to twist your spells
to suit your needs. Vou gain two of the following
Spell save DC~ 8 + your proficiencybonus + Metamagic options of your choice. Vou gain another one
your Charisma modifier at 10th and 17th leveI.

Spell attack modifier~ your proficiencybonus + Vou can use only one Metamagic option on a spell
your Charisma modifier when you cast it, unless otherwise noted.

PART I (I 'SSES

101


CAREFUL SPELL SORCEROUS RESTORATION
When you cast a spell that forces other creatures to make
a saving throw, you can protect some of those creatures At 20th levei, you regain 4 expended sorcery points
from the spell's full force. To do 50, you spend 1 sorcery whenever you finish a short resl.
point and choose a number of those creatures up to your
Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). A chosen SORCEROUS ORIGINS
creature automatically succeeds on its saving throw
against the spell. Different sorcerers c1aim different origins for their
innate magic. Although many variations exist, most
DISTANT SPELL of these origins fali into two categories: a draconic
When you cast a spell that has a range of 5 feet ar bloodline and wild magic.
greater, you can spend 1 sorcery point to double the
range of the spell. DRACONIC BLOODLINE

When you cast a spell that has a range of touch, you Vour innate magic comes from draconic magic that was
can spend 1 sorcery point to make the range of the mingled with your blood ar that of your ancestors. Most
spell 30 feel. often, sorcerers with this origin trace their descent
back to a mighty sorcerer of ancient times who made a
EMPOWERED SPELL bargain with a dragon ar who might even have c1aimed
When you roll damage for a spell, you can spend 1 a dragon parenl. Some of these bloodlines are well
sorcery point to reroll a number of the damage dice up established in the world, but most are obscure. Any
to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one). Vou must given sorcerer could be the first of a new bloodline, as a
use the new rolls. result of a pact ar some other exceptional circumstance.

Vou can use Empowered Spell even if you have DRAGON ANCESTOR
already used a different Metamagic option during the At 1st levei, you choose one type of dragon as your
casting of the spell. ancestor. The damage type associated with each dragon
is used by features you gain later.
EXTENDED SPELL
When you cast a spell lhat has a duration of 1 minute DRACONIC ANCESTRY
ar longer. you can spend 1 sorcery point to double its
duration, to a maximum duration of 24 hours. Dragon DamageType
Black Acid
HEIGHTENED SPELL Blue Lightning
When you cast a spell lhat forces a creature to make a Brass Fire
saving throw to resist its effects, you can spend 3sorcery Bronze Lightning
points to give one target of the spell disadvantage on its Copper Acid
first saving throw made against the spell. Gold Fire
Green Poison
QUICKENED SPELL Red Fire
When you cast a spell that has a casting time of 1 action, Silver Cold
you can spend 2 sorcery points to change the casting White Cold
time to 1 bonus action for this casting.
Vou can speak, read, and write Draconic. Additionally,
SUBTLE SPELL whenever you make a Charisma check when interacting
When you cast a spell, you can spend 1 sorcery point to with dragons, your proficiency bonus is doubled if it
cast it without any somatic ar verbal components. applies to the check.

TWINNED SPELL DRACONIC RESILIENCE
When you cast a spell that targets only one creature and As magic f10ws through your body, it causes physical
doesn't have a range of self, you can spend a number of traits of your dragon ancestors to emerge. At 1st levei,
sorcery points equal to the spell's levei to target a second your hit point maximum increases by 1 and increases by
creature in range with the same spell (I sorcery point if 1 again whenever you gain a levei in this c1ass.
the spell is a cantrip).
Additionally, parts of your skin are covered by a thin
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT sheen of dragon-Iike scales. When you aren't wearing
armar, your AC equals 13 + your Dexterity modifier.
When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score of your ELEM ENTAL AFFIN ITY
choice by 2, ar you can increase two ability scores of Starting at 6th levei, when you cast a spell thal deals
your choice by I. As normal, you can't increase an ability damage of the type associated with your draconic
score above 20 using this feature. ancestry, add your Charisma modifier to that damage.
At the same time, you can spend 1 sorcery point to gain
resistance to that damage type for 1 hour.

PART I I CLASSES

102


DRAGON WINGS can do so after the creature rolls but before any effects
At 14th levei, you gain the ability to sprout a pair of of the roll occur.
dragon wings from your back, gaining a flying speed
equal to your current speed. You can create these wings CONTROLLED CHAOS
as a bonus action on your turno They last until you At 14th levei, you gain a modicum of control over the
dismiss them as a bonus action on your turno surges of your wild magic. Whenever you roll on the
Wild Magic Surge table, you can roll twice and use
You can't manifest your wings while wearing armor either number.
unless the armor is made to accommodate them, and
clothing not made to accommodate your wings might SPELL BOMBARDMENT
be destroyed when you manifest them. Beginning at 18th leveI, the harmful energy of your
spells intensifies. When you roll damage for a spell and
DRACONIC PRESENCE roll the highest number possible on any of lhe dice,
Beginning at 18th leveI, you can channel the dread choose one of those dice, roll it again and add that roll to
presence of your dragon ancestor, causing those around the damage. You can use the feature only once per turno
you to become awestruck or frightened. As an action,
you can spend 5 sorcery points to draw on this power
and exude an aura of awe or fear (your choice) to a
distance of 60 feel. For I minute or until you lose your
concentration (as if you were casting a concentration
spell), each hostile creature that starts its turn in this
aura must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be
charmed (if you chose awe) or frightened (if you chose
fear) until the aura ends. A creature that succeeds on
this saving throw is immune to your aura for 24 hours.

WILD MAGIC

Your innate magic comes from the wild forces of chaos
that underlie the order of creation. You might have
endured exposure to some form of raw magic, perhaps
through a planar portalleading to Limbo, the Elemental
Planes, or lhe mysterious Far Realm. Perhaps you
were blessed by a powerful fey creature or marked bya
demon. Or your magic could be a fluke of your birth, with
no apparent cause or reason. However it carne to be, this
chaotic magic churns within you, waiting for any outlel.

WILD MAGIC SURGE
Starting when you choose this origin at 1st levei, your
spellcasting can unleash surges of untamed magic.
lmmediately after you cast a sorcerer spell of 1st levei
or higher, the DM can have you roll a d20. If you roll a
I, roll on the Wild Magic Surge table to create a random
magical effect.

TIDES OF CHAOS
Starting at 1st levei, you can manipulate the forces of
chance and chaos to gain advantage on one attack roll,
ability check, or saving throw. Once you do sO. you must
6nish a long rest before you can use this feature again.

Any time before you regain the use of lhis feature, the
DM can have you roll on the Wild Magic Surge table
immediately after you cast a sorcerer spell of I st levei or
higher. You then regain the use of this feature.

BEND LUCK
Starting at 6th levei, you have the ability to twist fate
using your wild magic. When another creature you can
see makes an attack roll, an ability check, or a saving
throw, you can use your reaction and spend 2 sorcery
points to roll Id4 and apply the number rolled as a
bonus or penalty (your choice) to the creature's roll. You


~dv:::;::========================r~,
WILD MAGIC SURGE

dl00 Effect dl00 Effect
01-02 RolI on this table at the start of each ofyour turns for 45-46
the next minute, ignoring this result on subsequent 47-48 You cast levita te on yourself.
03-04 rolls. 49-50
05-06 For the next minute, you can see any invisible creature 51-52 A unicorn controlled by the DM appears in a space
if you have line of sight to it. within 5 feet of you, then disappears 1 minute later.
07-08 A modron chosen and controlled by the DM appears 53-54 You can't speak for the next minute. Whenever you
09-10 in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of you, then 55-56 try, pink bubbles float out of your mouth.
11-12 disappears 1 minute later. 57-58
You castJireball as a 3rd.level spell centered on A spectral shield hovers near you for the next minute,
13-14 yourself. 59-60 granting you a +2 bonus to AC and immunity to magic
15-16 You cast magic missile as a 5th.level spell. 61-62 missile.
17-18 RolI a d10. Your height changes by a number ofinches 63-64
equal to the roll. If the roll is odd, you shrink. If the 65-66 You are immune to being intoxicated by alcohol for
19-20 roll is even, you grow. 67-68 the next 5d6 days.
21-22 You cast confusion centered on yourself. 69-70 Your hair falls out but grows back within 24 hours.
For the next minute, you regain 5 hit points at the For the next minute, any flammable object you touch
23-24 start of each of your turns. 71-72 that isn't being worn or carried by another creature
25-26 You grow a long beard made of feathers that remains 73-74 bursts into flame.
until you sneeze, at which point the feathers explode 75-76 You regain your lowest.level expended spell 5101.
27-28 out from your face. For the next minute, you must shout when you speak.
29-30 You cast grease centered on yourself. 77-78
31-32 Creatures have disadvantage on saving throws against 79-80 You castfog c10ud centered on yourself.
the next spell you cast in the next minute that involves 81-82
33-34 a saving throw. 83-84 Up to three creatures you choose within 30 feet of you
35-36 Your skin turns a vibrant shade ofblue. A remove curse take 4d10 lightning damage.
spell can end this effect. 85-86 You are frightened by the nearest creature until the
37-38 An eye appears on your forehead for the next minute. 87-88 end ofyour next turno
During that time, you have advantage on Wisdom 89-90 Each creature within 30 feet of you becomes invisible
39-40 (Perception) checks that rely on sight. for the next minute. lhe invisibility ends on a creature
41-42 For the next minute, ali your spells with a casting time 91-92 when it atlacks or casts a spell.
of 1 action have a casting time of 1 bonus action. 93-94 You gain resistance to ali damage for the next minute.
43-44 You teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space of 95-96 A random creature within 60 feet of you becomes
your choice that you can see. 97-98 poisoned for 1d4 hours.
You are transported to the Astral Plane until the 99-00 You glow with bright light in a 30.foot radius for the
end of your next turn, after which time you return next minute. Any creature that ends its turn within 5
to the space you previously occupied or the nearest feet ofyou is blinded until the end ofits next turno
unoccupied space if that space is occupied.
Maximize the damage ofthe next damaging spell you You cast po/ymorph on yourself. If you fail the saving
cast within the next minute.
RolI a d10. Your age changes by a number ofyears throw, you turn into a sheep for the spell's duration.
equal to the roll. If the roll is odd, you get younger IlIusory butlerflies and flower petals flutter in the air
(minimum 1 year old). Ifthe roll is even, you get older. within 10 feet of you for the next minute.
1d6 flumphs controlled by the DM appear in You can take one additional action immediately.
unoccupied spaces within 60 feet of you and are Each creature within 30 feet ofyou takes 1d10 necrotic
frightened of you. lhey vanish after 1 minute. damage. You regain hit points equal to the sum of the
You regain 2d10 hit points. necrotic damage dealt.
You turn into a potled plant until the start of your Vou cast mirror image.
next turno While a plant, you are incapacitated and You castf1y on a random creature within 60 feet ofyou.
have vulnerability to ali damage. If you drop to O hit You become invisible for the next minute. During that
points, your pot breaks, and your form reverts. time, other creatures can't hear you. lhe invisibility
For the next minute, you can teleport up to 20 feet as ends if you atlack or cast a spell.
a bonus action on each cf your turns. If you die within the next minute, you immediately

come back to life as if by the reincarnate spell.

Your size increases by one size category for the next
minute.
You and ali creatures within 30 feet of you gain
vulnerability to piercing damage for the next minute.
You are surrounded by faint, ethereal music for the
next minute.
You regain ali expended sorcery points.

104


WARLOCK

With a pseudodragon curled on his shoulder, a young
elf in golden robes smiles warmly, weaving a magical
charm into his honeyed words and bending the palace
sentinel to his will.

As fiames spring to life in her hands, a wizened
human whispers the secret na me of her demonic patron,
infusing her spell with fiendish magic.

Shifting his gaze between a battered tome and the
odd alignment of the stars overhead, a wild-eyed tiefiing
chants the mystic ritual that will open a doorway to a
distant world,

Warlocks are seekers of the knowledge that lies
hidden in the fabric of the multiverse, Through pacts
made with mysterious beings of supernatural power,
warlocks unlock magical effects both subtle and
spectacular. Drawing on the ancient knowledge of
beings such as fey nobles, demons, devils, hags, and
alien entities of the Far Realm, warlocks piece together
arcane secrets to bolster their own power,

SWORN AND BEHOLDEN

A warlock is defined by a pact with an otherworldly
being, Sometimes the relationship between warlock
and patron is like that of a c1erie and a deity, though
the beings that serve as patrons for warlocks are not
gods, A warlock might lead a cult dedicated to a demon
prince, an archdevil, or an utterly alien entity-beings
not typically served by c1erics, More often, though, the
arrangement is similar to that between a master and
an apprentice, The warlock learns and grows in power,
at the cost of occasional services performed on the
patron's behalf.

The magic bestowed on a warlock ranges from minor
but lasting alterations to the warlock's being (such as
the ability to see in darkness or to read any language)
to access to powerful spells, Unlike bookish wizards,
warlocks supplement their magic with some facility
at hand-to-hand combat. They are comfortable in light
armor and know how to use simple weapons,

DELVERS INTO SECRETS

Warlocks are driven by an insatiable need for knowledge
and power, which compels them into their pacts and
shapes their lives, This thirst drives warlocks into their
pacts and shapes their later careers as well.

Stories of warlocks binding themselves to fiends are
widely known, Sut many warlocks serve patrons that
are not fiendish. Sometimes a traveler in the wilds
comes to a strangely beautiful tower, meets its fey lord
or lady, and stumbles into a pact without being fully
aware of it. And sometimes, while poring over tomes of

PART I I CLASSES 105


Levei Proficieney Features Cantrips Spells Spell Slot Invocations
1st Bonus Otherworldly Patron, Paet Magie Known Known Slots Levei Known
2nd +2 Eldriteh Invoeations 1st
3rd +2 Paet Boon 2 2 1 1st 2
4th +2 Ability Seore Improvement 2 3 2 2nd 2
5th +2 2 4 2 2nd 2
6th +3 Otherworldly Patron feature 3 5 2 3rd 3
7th +3 3 6 2 3rd 3
8th +3 Ability Seore Improvement 3 7 2 4th 4
9th +3 3 8 2 4th 4
10th +4 Otherworldly Patron feature 3 9 2 5th 5
11th +4 Mystie Areanum (6th levei) 3 10 2 5th 5
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4 10 2 5th 5
13th +4 Mystie Areanum (7th levei) 4 11 3 5th 6
14th Otherworldly Patron feature 4 11 3 5th 6
15th Mystie Areanum (8th levei) 4 12 3 5th 6
16th Ability Seore Improvement 4 12 3 5th 7
17th Mystie Areanum (9th levei) 4 13 3 5th 7
18th 4 13 3 5th 7
19th 4 14 4 5th 8
20th 4 14 4 5th 8
4 15 4 5th 8
4 15 4

forbidden lore. a brilliant but crazed student's mind is Your patron's demands might drive you into adventures,
opened to realities beyond the material world and to the or they might consist entirely of small favors you can do
alien beings lhat dwell in the outer void. between adventures.

Once a pact is made, a warlock's thirst for knowledge What kind of relationship do you have with your
and power can't be slaked with mere study and research. patron? Is it friendly. antagonistic. uneasy. or romantic?
No one makes a pact with such a mighty palron if he or How important does your patron consider you to be?
she doesn't intend to use the power thus gained. Rather, What part do you play in your patron's plans? Do you
the vast majority of warlocks spend their days in active know other servants of your patron?
pursuit of their goals. which typically means some kind
of adventuring. Furthermore, the demands of their How does your patron communicate with you? If
patrons drive warlocks toward adventure. you have a familiar, it might occasionally speak with
your patron's voice. Some warlocks find messages
CREATING A WARLOCK frolll their patrons etched on trees, mingled among tea
leaves, or adrift in the clouds-messages that only the
As you make your warlock character, spend some time warlock can see. Other warlocks converse with their
thinking about your patron and the obligations that patrons in dreams or waking visions, or deal only with
your pact imposes upon you. What led you to make the intermediaries.
pact, and how did you make contact with your patron?
Wcrc you seduced into sumllloning a devi!, or did you QUICK BUILD
seek out the ritual thal would allow you to make contact
with an alien elder god? Did you search for your patron, Vou can make a warlock quickly by following these
or did your patron find and choose you? Do you chafe suggestions. First. Charisma should be your highest
under the obligations of your pact or serve joyfully in ability score, followed by Constitution. Second, choose
anticipation of the rewards promised to you? the charlatan background. Third. choose the eldritch
blast and chill touch cantrips, along with the 1st-leveI
Work with your DM to determine how big a part your spells ray of sickness and witch bolt.
pact will play in your character's adventuring career.
CLASS FEATURES

As a warlock, YOll gain the following class features.

HIT POINTS

Hit Dice: ld8 per warlock levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ld8 (or 5) + your

Constitution 1Il0difier per warlock levei after 1st

PART I I CLASSES

)06


PROFICIENCIES Addilionally, when you gain a levei in this class,
Armor: Lighl armor you can choose one of lhe warlock spells you know
Weapons: Simple weapons and replace il wilh anolher spell from lhe warlock
Tools: None spelllisl, which also musl be of a leveI for which you
have spell sioIs.
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose lwo skills from Arcana, SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Charisma is your spellcasling abilily for your warlock
Deceplion, Hislory, !nlimidalion, Invesligalion, spells, so you use your Charisma whenever a spell refers
Nalure, and Religion lo your spellcasling abilily. In addition, you use your
Charisma modifier when selling lhe saving lhrow DC
EQUIPMENT for a warlock spell you casl and when making an allack
Vou slarl wilh lhe following equipmenl, in addilion lo roll wilh one.
lhe equipmenl granled by your background:
Spell save De = 8 + your proficiency bonus +
(a) a lighl crossbow and 20 bo!ls or (b) any simple your Charisma modifier
weapon
(a) a componenl pouch or (b) an arcane focus Spell altack modifier = your proficiency bonus +
(a) a scholar's pack or (b) a dungeoneer's pack your Charisma modifier
Lealher armor, any simple weapon, and lwo daggers
SPELLCASTING Focus
OTHERWORLDLY PATRON
Vou can use an arcane focus (found in chapler 5) as a
AI Isllevel, you have slruck a bargain wilh an spellcasling focus for your warlock spells.
olherworldly being of your choice: lhe Archfey, lhe
Fiend, or lhe Greal Old One, each of which is delailed ELDRITCH INVOCATIONS
aI lhe end of lhe class descriplion, Your choice
granls you fealures aI Isllevel and again aI 61h, 101h, In your sludy of occulllore, you have unearlhed e!drilch
and 141h leveI. invocalions, fragmenls of forbidden knowledge lhal
imbue you wilh an abiding magical abilily.
PACT MAGIC
AI 2nd levei, you gain lwo eldrilch invocalions of your
Your arcane research and lhe magic beslowed on you choice. Your invocalion oplions are delailed aI lhe end
by your palron have given you facilily wilh spells. See of lhe class descriplion. When you gain cerlain warlock
chapter 10 for lhe general rules of spellcasling and leveis, you gain addilional invocalions of your choice,
chapter 11 for lhe warlock spelllisl. as shown in lhe lnvocalions Known column of lhe
Warlock lable.
CANTRIPS
Vou know lwo canlrips of your choice from lhe warlock Addilionally, when you gain a levei in lhis class,
spelllisl. Vou learn addilional warlock canlrips of your you can choose one of lhe invocalions you know and
choice aI higher leveis, as shown in lhe Canlrips Known replace il wilh anolher invocalion lhal you could learn
column of lhe Warlock lable. aI lhal leveI.

SPELL SLOTS PACT BOON
The Warlock lable shows how many spell slols you have.
The lable also shows whallhe leveI of lhose slols is; ali AI 3rd levei, your olherworldly palron beslows a gifl
of your spell slols are lhe same leveI. To casl one of your upon you for your loyal service. Vou gain one of lhe
warlock spells of Isllevel or higher, you musl expend a following fealures of your choice.
spell slol. Vou regain ali expended spell slols when you
finish a shorl or long resl. PACT OF THE CHAIN
Vou learn lhe find familiar spell and can casl il as a
For example, when you are 51h leveI, you have rilual. The spell doesn'l counl againsl your number of
lwo 3rd-level spell sioIs. To casllhe Isl-level spell spells known.
thunderwave, you musl spend one of lhose sioIs, and
you caSl il as a 3rd-level spell. When you casllhe spell, you can choose one of lhe
normal forms for your familiar or one of lhe following
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND HIGHER special forms: imp, pseudodragon, quasil, or sprile.
AI Isllevel, you know lwo Isl-level spells of your choice
from lhe warlock spelllisl. Additionally, when you lake lhe Allack aclion, you can
forgo one of your own allacks lo allow your familiar lo
The Spells Known column of lhe Warlock lable shows make one allack of ils own.
when you learn more warlock spells ofyour choice of ls1
levei and higher. A spell you choose musl be of a levei PACT OF THE BLADE
no higher lhan whal's shown in lhe lable's Slol LeveI Vou can use your aclion lo creale a pacl weapon in your
column for your leveI. When you reach 61h levei, for emply hand. Vou can choose lhe form thal this melee
example, you learn a new warlock spell, which can be weapon lakes each time you creale il (see chapler 5 for
ISI, 2nd, or 3rd leveI. weapon oplions). Vou are proficienl with il while you
wield il. This weapon counls as magical for lhe purpose
of overcoming resislance and immunily lo nonmagical
allacks and damage.


Your pact weapon disappears if it is more than 5 feet ••• •••
away from you for 1 minute or more. It also disappears
if you use this feature again. if you dismiss the weapon YOUR PACT BOON
(no action required), or if you die,
Each Pacl Boon oplion produces a special crealure or an
Vou can transform one magic weapon into your pact objecl thal refiecls your palron's nalure.
weapon by performing a special ritual while you hold
the weapon. Vou perform the ritual over the course Pact ofthe Chain. Your familiar is more cunning than a
of 1 hour, which can be done during a short rest. typical familiar. Ils defaull form can be a refieclion of your
Vou can then dismiss the weapon, shunting it into an
extradimensional space, and it appears whenever you palron, with spriles and pseudodragons tied to lhe Archfey
create your pact weapon thereafter. Vou can't affect an and imps and quasits lied to lhe Fiend. Because lhe Great Old
artifact or a sentient weapon in this way. The weapon One's nalure is inscrulable, any familiar form is suitable for il.
ceases being your pact weapon if you die, if you perform
the l.hour ritual on a different weapon, or ifyou use Pact afthe 8lade. If your patron is the Archfey, your
a l.hour ritual to break your bond to it. The weapon weapon mighl be a slender blade wrapped in leafy vines.
appears at your feet if it is in the extradimensional space If you serve the Fiend, your weapon could be an axe made
when the bond breaks. of black metal and adorned wilh decorative fiames. If your
palron is lhe Greal Old One, your weapon mighl be an
PACT OF THE TOME ancienl.looking spear, wilh a gemslone embedded in ils
head, carved to look like a lerrible unblinking eye.
Your patron gives you a grimoire called a Book of
Shadows. When you gain this feature, choose three Pact ofthe Tome. Your Book ofShadows might be a fine,
cantrips from any class's spelllist. While the book is on gíll-edged lome wilh spells of enchanlmenl and illusion,
your person, you can cast those cantrips at will. They gifted lo you by lhe lordly Archfey. It could be a weighty tome
don't count against your number of cantrips known. bound in demon hide sludded wilh iron, holding spells of
conjuralion and a weallh offorbidden lore aboul lhe sinisler
[f you lose your Book of Shadows, you can perform regions of lhe cosmos, a gíft of lhe Fiend. ar il could be lhe
a l.hour ceremony to receive a replacement from your tattered diary of a lunatic driven mad by conlact wilh the
patrono This ceremony can be performed during a short Greal Old One, holding scraps of spells lhal only your own
or long rest, and it destroys the previous book. The book burgeoning insanity allows you lo undersland and casl.
turns to ash when you die.
~r
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
OTHERWORLDLY PATRONS
When you reach 4th leveI. and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of your The beings that serve as patrons for warlocks are
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of mighty inhabitants of other planes of existence-not
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability gods, but almost godlike in their power. Various patrons
score above 20 using this feature. give their warlocks access to different powers and
invocations, and expect significant favors in returno
MYSTIC ARCANUM
Some patrons collect warlocks, doling out mystic
At 11th levei, your patron bestows upon you a magical knowledge relatively freely or boasting of their ability
secret called an arca num. Choose one 6th-leveI spell to bind mortaIs to their will. Other patrons bestow their
from the warlock spelllist as this arcanum. power only grudgingly, and might make a pact with
only one warlock. Warlocks who serve the same patron
Vou can cast your arca num spell once without might view each other as allies, siblings, or rivaIs.
expending a spell slot. Vou must finish a long rest before
you can do so again. THEARCHFEY

At higher leveIs, you gain more warlock spells of your Your patron is a lord or lady of the fey, a creature of
choice that can be cast in this way: one 7th.level spell legend who holds secrets that were forgotten before
at 13th leveI, one 8th.level spell at 15th levei, and one the mortal races were born. This being's motivations
9th-leveI spell at 17th leveI. Vou regain all uses of your are often inscrutable, and sometimes whimsical, and
Mystic Arcanum when you finish a long rest. might involve a striving for greater magical power or the
settling of age-old grudges. Beings of this sort include
ELDRITCH MASTER the Prince of Frost; the Queen of Air and Darkness,
ruler of the Gloaming Court; Titania of the Summer
At 20th leveI, you can draw on your inner reserve of Court; her consort Oberon, the Green Lord; Hyrsam,
mystical power while entreating your patron to regain the Prince of Fools; and ancient hags.
expended spell slots. Vou can spend 1 minute entreating
your patron for aid to regain all your expended spell slots EXPANDED SPELL LIST
from your Pact Magic feature. Once you regain spell slots The Archfey lets you choose from an expanded list of
with this feature, you must finish a long rest before you spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following
can do so again. spells are added to the warlock spelllist for YOU.

ARCHFEY EXPANDED SPELLS

Spell Levei Spells
1st faerie fire, sleep
2nd calm emotions, phantosmal force
3rd blink, plont growth
4th dominate beast, greater invisibility
5th dominate person, seeming

108 PART I I CLASSES


FEY PRESENCE EXPANDED SPELL LIST
Starting at 1st leveI, your patron bestows upon you the
ability to project the beguiling and fearsome presence The Fiend lets you choose from an expanded list of
of the fey. As an action, you can cause each creature in spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following
a 10-foot cube originating from you to make a Wisdom spells are added to the warlock spelllist for YOU.
saving throw against your warlock spell save DC. The
creatures that fail their saving throws are ali charmed FIEND EXPANDED SPELlS
or frightened by you (your choice) until the end of
your next turno Spelllevel Spells
1st burning hands, command
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 2nd b/indnessjdeaJness, scorching roy
you finish a short or long rest. 3rd fireba//, stinking c10ud
4th fire shield, wa// oJfire
MISTY ESCAPE 5th flame strike, ha//ow
Starting at 6th leveI, you can vanish in a puff of mist in
response to harm. When you take damage, you can use DARK ONE'S BLESSING
your reaction to turn invisible and teleport up to 60 feet Starting at 1st levei, when you reduce a hostile creature
to an unoccupied space you can see. Vou remain invisible to Ohit points, you gain temporary hit points equal to your
until the start of your next turn or until you attack or Charisma modifier + your warlock levei (minimum of 1).
cast a spell.
DARK ONE'S OWN LUCK
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until Starting at 6th leveI, you can call on your patron to alter
you finish a short or long rest. fate in your favor. When you make an ability check or a
saving throw, you can use this feature to add a dlO to
BEGUILING DEFENSES your roll. Vou can do so after seeing the initial roll but
Beginning at 10th levei, your patron teaches you how to before any of the roll's effects occur.
turn the mind-affecting magic of your enemies against
them. Vou are immune to being charmed, and when Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
another creature attempts to charm you, you can use you finish a short or long rest.
your reaction to attempt to turn the charm back on
that creature. The creature must succeed on a Wisdom FIENDISH RESILIENCE
saving throw against your warlock spell save DC or Starting at 10th leveI, you can choose one damage type
be charmed by you for 1 minute or until the creature when you finish a short or long rest. Vou gain resistance
takes any damage. to that damage type until you choose a different one
with this feature. Damage from magical weapons or
DARK DELIRIUM silver weapons ignores this resistance.
Starting at 14th leveI, you can plunge a creature into
an illusory realm. As an action, choose a creature HURL THROUGH HELL
that you can see within 60 feet of YOU.It must make a Starting at 14th leveI, when you hit a creature with an
Wisdom saving throw against your warlock spell save attack, you can use this feature to instantly transport
DC. On a failed save, it is charmed or frightened by you the target through the lower planes. The creature
(your choice) for 1 minute or until your concentration disappears and hurtles through a nightmare landscape.
is broken (as if you are concentrating on a spell). This
effect ends early if the creature takes any damage. At the end of your next turn, the target returns to the
space it previously occupied, or the nearest unoccupied
Until this illusion ends, the creature thinks it is lost space. ]f the target is not a fiend, it takes IOdlO psychic
in a misty realm, the appearance of which you choose. damage as it reels from its horrific experience.
The creature can see and hear only itself, you, and
the illusion. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a long rest.
Vou must finish a short or long rest before you can
use this feature again. THE GREAT OLD ONE

THE FIEND Vour patron is a mysterious entity whose nature is
utterly foreign to the fabric of reality. It might come from
Vou have made a pact with a fiend from the lower the Far Realm, the space beyond reality, or it could be
planes of existence, a being whose aims are evil, one of the elder gods known only in legends. [ts motives
even if you strive against those aims. Such beings are incomprehensible to mortaIs, and its knowledge so
desire the corruption or destruction of ali things, immense and ancient that even the greatest libraries
ultimately including you. Fiends powerful enough to pale in comparison to the vast secrets it holds. The
forge a pact include demon lords such as Demogorgon, Great Old One might be unaware of your existence
Orcus, Fraz'Urb-Iuu, and Baphomet; archdevils such or entirely indifferent to you, but the secrets YOllhave
as Asmodeus, Dispater, Mephistopheles, and Belial; learned allow YOllto draw YOllrmagic from it.
pit fiends and balors that are especially mighty; and
ultroloths and other lords of the yugoloths. Entities of this type inclllde Ghallnadar, called That
Which Lllrks; Tharizdun, the Chained God; Dendar, the
Night Serpent; Zargon, the Retllrner; Great Cthlllhll;
and other unfathomable beings.

PART 1 (l .\SSES

°9


EXPANDED SPELL LIST ARMOR OF SHADOWS
The Great Old One lets you choose from an expanded list Vou can cast mage armor on yourself at will, without
of spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following expending a spell slot or material components.
spells are added to the warlock spelllist for you.
ASCENDANT STEP
GREAT OlO ONE EXPANOEO SPEllS Prerequisite: 9th leveI
Vou can cast levitate on yourself at will, without
Spelllevel Spells expending a spell slot or material components.
1st dissonant whispers, Tasha's hideous /aughter
2nd detect thoughts, phantasma/ force BEAST SPEECH
3rd elairvoyance, sending Vou can cast speak with animaIs at will, without
4th dominate beast, Evard's b/ack tentaeles expending a spell slot.
5th dominate person, telekine,i,
BEGUILING INFLUENCE
AWAKENED MIND Vou gain proficiency in the Deception and
Starting at 1st levei, your alien knowledge gives you Persuasion skills.
the ability to touch the minds of other creatures. Vou
can communicate telepathically with any creature you BEWITCHING WHISPERS
can see within 30 feet ofyou. Vou don't need to share Prerequisite: 7th leveI
a language with the creature for it to understand your
telepathic utterances, but the creature must be able to Vou can cast compulsion once using a warlock spell slot.
understand at least one language. Vou can't do so again until you finish a long rest.

ENTROPIC WARD BOOK OF ANCIENT SECRETS
At 6th levei, you learn to magically ward yourself against Prerequisite: Pact of the Tome feature
attack and to turn an enemy's failed strike into good
luck for yourself, When a creature makes an attack Vou can now inscribe magical rituais in your Book of
roll against you, you can use your reaction to impose Shadows. Choose two 1st-leveI spells that have the
disadvantage on that roll. ]f the attack misses you, your ritual tag fram any c1ass's spelllist. The spells appear
next attack roll against the creature has advantage if you in the book and don't count against the number of spells
make it before the end of your next turno you know. With your Book of Shadows in hand, you
can cast the chosen spells as rituais. Vou can't cast the
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until spells except as rituais, unless you've learned them by
you finish a short or long resto some other means. Vou can also cast a warlock spell
you know as a ritual if it has the ritual tag.
THOUGHT SHIELD
Starting at 10th levei, your thoughts can't be read by On your adventures, you can add other ritual spells to
telepathy or other means unless you allow it. Vou also your Book of Shadows. When you find such a spell, you
have resistance to psychic damage, and whenever a can add it to the book if the spell's levei is equal to or
creature deals psychic damage to you, that creature less than half your warlock leveI (rounded up) and if you
takes the same amount of damage that you do. can spare the time to transcribe the spell. For each levei
of the spell, the transcription process takes 2 hours and
CREATE THRALL costs 50 gp for the rare inks needed to inscribe it.
At 14th levei, you gain the ability to infect a humanoid's
mind with the alien magic of your patrono Vou can use CHAINS OF CARCERI
your action to touch an incapacitated humanoid. That Prerequisite: 15th leveI, Pactofthe Chain feature
creature is then charmed by you until a remove curse
spell is cast on it, the charmed condition is removed Vou can cast hold monster at will-targeting a celestial,
from it, or you use this feature again. fiend, or elemental-without expending a spell slot or
material components. Vou must finish a long rest before
Vou can communicate telepathically with the charmed you can use this invocation on the same creature again.
creature as long as the two Dfyou are on the same plane
Dfexistence. DEVIL'S SIGHT
Vou can see normally in darkness, both magical and
ELDRITCH INVOCATIONS nonmagical, to a distance Df 120 feet.

If an eldritch invocation has prerequisites, you must DREADFUL WORD
meet them to learn it. Vou can learn the invocation at the Prerequisite: 7th leveI
same time that you meet its prerequisites. Vou can cast confusion once using a warlock spell slol.
Vou can't do so again until you finish a long rest.
AGONIZING BLAST
Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip ELDRITCH SIGHT
Vou can cast detect magic at will, without expending
When you cast eldritch blast, add your Charisma a spell slot.
modifier to the damage it deals on a hit.

I'ART 1 I CLASSES

110


ELDRITCH SPEAR OTHERWORLDLY LEAP
Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip Prerequisite: 9th leveI
Vou can castjump on yourself at \ViII,\Vithout expending
When you cast eldritch blast, its range is 300 feel. a spell slot or material components.

EYES OF THE RUNE KEEPER REPELLING BLAST
VOUcan read ali writing. Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip
When you hit a creature with eldritch blast. you can push
FIENDISH VIGOR the creature up to 10 feet away from you in a straight line.
VOUcan cast false /ife on yourself at will as a
1st-levei spell, without expending a spell slot or SCULPTOR OF FLESH
material components. Prerequisite: 7th leveI

GAZE OF Two MINDS Vou can cast polymorph once using a warIock spell slol.
VOUcan use your action to touch a willing humanoid Vou can't do so again until you finish a long resl.
and perceive through its senses until the end ofyour
next turno As long as the creature is on the same SIGN OF ILL OMEN
plane of existence as you, you can use your action Prerequisite: 5th leveI
on subsequent turos to maintain this connection, Vou can cast bestow curse once using a warIock spell
extending the duration until the end of your next turno slol. Vou can't do so again until you finish a long resl.
While perceiving through the other creature's senses,
you benefit from any special senses possessed by that THIEF OF FIVE FATES
creature, and you are blinded and deafened to your own VOUcan cast bane once using a warIock spell slot. Vou
surroundings. can't do so again until YOII finish a long resl.

LIFEDRIN KER THIRSTING BLADE
Prerequisite: 12th leveI, Pact of lhe 81ade fcature Prerequisite: 5th leveI, Pact of the 81ade feature
Vou can attack with your pact weapon t\Vice. instead of
When you hit a creature with your pact weapon, the once, whenever you take the Attack action on your tllrn.
creature takes extra necrotic damage equal to your
Charisma modifier (minimum 1). VISIONS OF DISTANT REALMS
Prerequisite: 15th levei
MASK OF MANY FACES
VOUcan cast disguise self at will, without expending Vou can cast arcane eye at wilI, without expending
a spell slol. a spell slot.

MASTER OF MYRIAD FORMS VOICE OF THE CHAIN MASTER
Prerequisile: 15th leveI Prerequisite: Pact ofthe Chain feature
Vou can communicate teIepathically with your familiar
Vou can cast alter self at will, without expending and perceive through your familiar's senses as long as
a spell slol. you are on the same plane of existence. Additionally,
while perceiving through your familiar's senses, you can
MINIONS OF CHAOS also speak through your familiar in your own voice, evcn
Prerequisite: 9th leveI if your familiar is normally incapable of speech.

Vou can cast conjure elemenlal once using a WHISPERS OF THE GRAVE
warIock spell slol. Vou can't do so again until you Prerequisite: 9th levei
finish a long resl. Vou can cast speak with dead at wilI, without expending
a spell slot.
MIRE THE MIND
Prerequisite: 5th leveI WITCH SIGHT
Prerequisite: 15th leveI
Vou can cast slow once using a warIock spell slol. Vou Vou can see the true form of any shapechanger or
can't do so again until you finish a long resl. creature concealed by illusion or transmutation magic
while the creature is within 30 feet of you and within
MISTY VISIONS line of sighl.
VOUcan cast silenl image at wilI, without expending a
spell slot or material components.

ONE WITH SHADOWS
Prerequisite: 5th leveI

When you are in an area of dim light or darkness, you
can use your action to become invisible until you move
ar take ao acHa0 ar a reaction.

PARf 1 (l SE


WIZARD

Clad in the silver robes that denote her station, an
elf closes her eyes to shut out the distractions of the
battletield and begins her quiet chant. Fingers weaving
in front of her, she completes her spell and launches a
tiny bead of tire toward the enemy ranks, where it erupts
into a confiagration that engulfs the soldiers.

Checking and rechecking his work, a human scribes
an intricate magic circle in chalk on the bare stone
fioor, then sprinkles powdered iron along every line and
graceful curve. When the circle is complete, he drones a
long incantation. A hole opens in space inside the circle,
bringing a whiff of brimstone from the otherworldly
plane beyond.

Crouching on the fioor in a dungeon intersection, a
gnome tosses a handful of small bones inscribed with
mystic symbols, muttering a few words of power over
them. Closing his eyes to see the visions more clearly,
he nods slowly, then opens his eyes and points down the
passage to his left.

Wizards are supreme magic-users, detined and united
as a class by the spells they cast. Drawing on the subtle
weave of magic that permeates the cosmos, wizards cast
spel1s of explosive tire, arcing lightning, subtle deception,
and brute.force mind control. Their magic conjures
monsters from other planes of existence, glimpses the
future, or turns slain foes into zombies. Their mightiest
spel1s change one substance into another, cal1 meteors
down from the sky, or open portaIs to other worlds.

SCHOLARS OF THE ARCANE

Wild and enigmatic, varied in form and function, the
power of magic draws students who seek to master
its mysteries. Some aspire to become like the gods,
shaping reality itself. Though the casting of a typical
spel1 requires merely the utterance of a few strange
words, fieeting gestures, and sometimes a pinch or
clump of exotic materiaIs, these surface components
barely hint at the expertise attained after years of
apprenticeship and countless haurs of study.

Wizards live and die by their spel1s. Everything else
is secondary. They learn new spel1s as they experiment
and grow in experience. They can also learn them fram
other wizards, from ancient tomes or inscriptions,
and from ancient creatures (such as the fey) that are
steeped in magic.

PART 1 I CLASSES

112


Preficiency Cantrips -Spells Slets per Spell Level-

Levei Bonus Features Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th

1st +2 Spelleasting, Areane Reeevery 32

2nd +2 Areane Traditien 33

3rd +2 3 42

4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 4 43

5th +3 4 432

6th +3 Areane Traditien feature 4 433

7th +3 4 4331

8th +3 Ability Seere Improvement 4 4332

•.. 9th +4 4 43331

~ 10th +4 Areane Traditien feature 5 43332

11th +4 5 433321

12th +4 Ability Seere Improvement 5 433321

13th +5 5 4333211

14th +5 Areane Tradition feature 5 4333211

15th +5 5 4333211

16th +5 Ability Seore Improvement 5 4333211

17th +6 5 4333211

18th +6 Spell Mastery 5 4333311

19th +6 Ability Seore Improvement 5 4333321

20th +6 Signature Spell 5 4333322

THE LURE OF KNOWLEDGE QUICK BUILD

Wizards' lives are seldom mundane, The dosest a Vou can make a wizard quickly by following these
wizard is likely to come to an ordinary life is working suggestions. First, Intelligence should be your highest
as a sage or lecturer in a library or university, teaching ability score, followed by Constitution or Dexterity.
others the secrets of the multiverse. Other wizards sell If you plan to join the School of Enchantment, make
their services as diviners, serve in military forces, or Charisma your next-best score. Second, choose the sage
pursue lives of crime or domination. background. Third, choose the mage hand, light, and
ray af frost cantrips, alang with the fallowing 1st-leveI
But the lure of knowledge and power calls even the spells for your spellboak: burning hands, eharm persan,
most unadventurous wizards out of the safety of their feather fali, mage armar. magie missi/e, and s/eep.
libraries and laboratories and into crumbling ruins and
lost cities. Most wizards believe that their counterparts CLASS FEATURES
in ancient civilizations knew secrets of magic that have
been lost to the ages, and discovering those secrets As a wizard, yau gain the follawing dass features.
could unlock the path to a power greater than any magic
available in the present age. HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d6 per wizard leveI
CREATING A WIZARD Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 6 + your Canstitutian modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: 1d6 (or 4) + your
Creating a wizard character demands a backstory
dominated by at least one extraordinary event. How Constitution modifier per wizard leveI after 1st
did your character first come into contact with magic?
How did you discover you had an aptitude for it? Do PROFICIENCIES darts, slings, quarterstaffs.
you have a natural talent, or did you simply study Armor: None
hard and practice incessantly? Did you encounter a Weapons: Daggers,
magical creature or an ancient tome that taught you the
basics of magic? light crossbows
Tools: None
What drew you forth from your life of study? Did your
first taste of magical knowledge leave you hungry for Saving Throws: Intelligenee, Wisdom
more? Have you received word of a secret repository Skills: Choose two from Areana, History, Insight,
of knowledge not yet plundered by any other wizard?
Perhaps you're simply eager to put your newfound Investigation, Medicine, and Religion
magical skills to the test in the face of danger.

PART I CLASSES

113


EQUIPMENT SPELLBOOK
Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to At 1st leveI. you have a spellbook eontaining six 1st-levei
the equipment granted by your baekground: wizard spells of your ehoice.

(a) a quarterstaff or (b) a dagger PREPARING ANO CASTING SPELLS
(a) a eomponent poueh or (b) an areane foeus The Wizard lable shows how many spell slots you have
(a) a seholar's paek or (b) an explorer's paek to east your spells of 1st leveI and higher. To east one of
A spellbook these spells, you must expend a slol of the spelJ's leveI
or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
SPELLCASTING finish a long rest.

As a student of areane magic, you have a spellbook Vou prepare the Iist of wizard spells that are available
eontaining spells that show the first glimmerings of for you to east. To do so, ehoose a number of wizard
your true power, See ehapter 10 for the general rules of spells from your spellbook equal to your Intelligenee
spelleasting and ehapter 11 for the wizard spelllist. modifier + your wizard leveI (minimum of one spell). The
spells must be of a leveI for whieh you have spell slots.
CANTRIPS
At 1st leveI, you know three eantrips of your ehoice For example, if you're a 3rd-level wizard, you have
from the wizard spelllist. Vou learn additional wizard four 1st-leve! and two 2nd-levei spell slots. With an
eantrips ofyour ehoice at higher leveIs, as shown in the lntelligenee of 16, your list of prepared spells ean
Cantrips Known eolumn of the Wizard table, include six spells of 1st or 2nd leveI, in any eombination,
ehosen from your spellbook. If you prepare the 1st-levei
4• spell magie missiJe, you ean east it using a 1st-Ievel or a
2nd-levei slot. Casting lhe spell doesn't remove it from
YOUR SPELLBOOK your Iist of prepared spells.

The spells that Vou add to your spellbook as Vou gain leveis Vou ean ehange your list of prepared spells when
refiect the arcane research Vou conduct on your own, as well you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of wizard
as intellectual breakthroughs Vou have had about the nature spells requires time spent studying your spellbook and
ofthe multiverse. You might find other spells during your memorizing the ineantations and gestures you must
adventures. You could discover a spell recorded on a scroll in make to east the spell: aI least 1 minute per spelllevel
an evil wizard's chest, for example, or in a dusty tome in an for eaeh spell on your Iist.

ancient library. SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Copy;ng a Spell ;nlo lhe Book. When Vou find a wizard spell lntelligenee is your spelleasting abilily for your wizard
spells, sinee you learn your spells through dedieated
of 1st levei or higher, Vou can add it to your spellbook if it is study and memorization. Vou use your Intelligenee
of a levei for which Vou have spell slots and if Vou can spare whenever a spell refers to your spel1casting ability.
the time to decipher and copy il. In addition, you use your Inlelligenee modifier when
setting the saving throw DC for a wizard spell you east
Copying a spell into your spellbook involves reproducing and when making an attaek roll with one.
the basic form of the spell, then deciphering the unique
system of notation used by the wizard who wrote il. You Spell save De = 8 + your proficiency bonus +
must practice the spell until Vou understand the sounds your Intelligence modifier
or gestures required, then transcribe it into your spellbook
Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus +
using your own notation.
For each levei of the spell, the process takes 2 hours and your Intelligence modifier

costs 50 gp. The cost represents material components Vou RITUAL CASTING
expend as Vou experiment with the spell to master it, as well Vou ean east a wizard spell as a ritual if that spell has
as the fine inks Vou need to record il. Once Vou have spent the ritual tag and you have the spell in your spellbook.
this time and money, Vou can prepare the spell just like your Vou don't need to have the spell prepared.

other spells. SPELLCASTING Focus
Replacing lhe Book. You can copy a spell from your own
Vou ean use an areane foeus (found in ehapler 5) as a
spellbook into another book-for example, if Vou want spelleasting foeus for your wizard spells.
to make a backup copy of your spellbook. This is just like
copying a new spell into your spellbook, but faster and easier, LEARNING SPELLS OF 1sT LEVEL ANO HIGHER
since Vou understand your own notation and already know Eaeh time you gain a wizard leveI, you ean add two
how to cast the spell. You need spend only 1 hour and 10 gp wizard spells of your ehoiee to your spellbook. Eaeh
of these spells must be of a leveI for whieh you have
for each levei of the copied spell. spell slots, as shown on lhe Wizard table. On your
advenlures, you might find other spells lhat you ean add
If Vou lose your spellbook, Vou can use the same procedure to your spellbook (see the "Your Spellbook" sidebar).

to transcribe the spells that Vou have prepared into a new

spellbook. Filling out the remainder of your spellbook

requires Vou to find new spells to do so, as normal. For this

reason, many wizards keep backup spellbooks in a safe place.

The Book's Appea,ance. Your spellbook is a unique

compilation af spells, with its own decorative f10urishes and

margin notes. It might be a plain, functionalleather volume

that Vou received as a gift from your master, a finely bound

gilt-edged tome Vou found in an ancient library, or even a

loose collection of notes scrounged together afler Vou lost

your previous spellbook in a mishap. ••

••

PART I I CLASSES

111-


ARCANE RECOVERY the ages have cataloged thousands of spells, grouping
them into eight categories called schools, as described
Vou have learned to regain some of your magical energy in chapter 10. In some places, these traditions are
by studying your spellbook. Once per day when you literally schools; a wizard might study at the School of
finish a short rest, you can choose expended spell slots lllusion while another studies across town at the School
to recover. The spell slots can have a combined leveI that of Enchantment. In other institutions, the schools are
is equal to or less than half your wizard leveI (rounded more like academic departments, with rival faculties
up), and none of the slots can be 6th leveI or higher. competing for students and funding. Even wizards who
train apprentices in the solitude of their own towers use
For example, ifyou're a 4th-leveI wizard, you can recover the division of magic into schools as a learning device,
up to two leveIs worth of spell slots. Vou can recover either since the spells of each school require mastery of
a 2nd-leveI spell slot or two 1st-levei spell slots. different techniques.

ARCANE TRADITION SCHOOL OF ABJURATION

When you reach 2nd levei, you choose an arcane The School of Abjuration emphasizes magic that blocks,
tradition, shaping your practice of magic through one banishes, or protects. Oetractors of this school say
of eight schools: Abjuration, Conjuration, Oivination, that its tradition is about denial, negation rather than
Enchantment, Evocation, lllusion, Necromancy, positive assertion. Vou understand, however, that ending
or Transmutation, ali detailed at the end of the harmful effects, protecting the weak, and banishing evil
class description. influences is anything but a philosophical void. It is a
proud and respected vocation.
Your choice grants you features at 2nd leveI and again
at 6th, 10th, and 14th leveI. Called abjurers, members of this school are sought
when baleful spirits require exorcism, when important
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT locations must be guarded against magical spying, and
when portaIs to other planes of existence must be closed.
When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th. 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of your ABJURATION SAVANT
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability Beginning when you select this school at 2nd leveI, the
score above 20 using this feature. gold and time you must spend to copy an abjuration
spell into your spellbook is halved.
SPELL MASTERY
ARCANE WARD
At 18th leveI, you have achieved such mastery over
certain spells that you can cast them at will. Choose a Starting at 2nd levei, you can weave magic around
1st-levei wizard spell and a 2nd.level wizard spell that yourself for protection. When you cast an abjuration
are in your spellbook. Vou can cast those spells at their spell of I st leveI or higher, you can simultaneously use a
lowest leveI without expending a spell slot when you strand of the spell's magic to create a magical ward on
have them prepared. 1£you want to cast either spell at a yourself that lasts until you finish a long rest. The ward
higher leveI, you must expend a spell slot as normal. has hit points equal to twice your wizard leveI + your
Intelligence modifier. Whenever you take damage, the
By spending 8 hours in study, you can exchange one ward takes the damage instead. lf this damage reduces
or both of the spells you chose for different spells of the ward to O hit points, you take any remaining damage.
the same leveIs.
While the ward has O hit points, it can't absorb
SIGNATURE SPELLS damage, but its magic remains. Whenever you cast an
abjuration spell of 1st leveI or higher, the ward regains a
When you reach 20th levei, you gain mastery over two number of hit points equal to twice the leveI of the spell.
powerful spells and can cast them with little effort.
Choose two 3rd.level wizard spells in your spellbook Once you create the ward, you can't create it again
as your signature spells. Vou always have these spells until you finish a long resto
prepared, they don't count against the number of spells
you have prepared, and you can cast each of them once at PROJECTED WARD
3rd leveI without expending a spell slot. When you do so,
you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest. Starting at 6th leveI. when a creature that you can see
within 30 feet of you takes damage, you can use your
1£you want to cast either spell at a higher leveI, you reaction to cause your Arcane Ward to absorb that
must expend a spell slot as normal. damage. If this damage reduces the ward to O hit points,
the warded creature takes any remaining damage.
ARCANE TRADITIONS
IMPROVED ABJURATION
The study of wizardry is ancient, stretching back to
the earliest mortal discoveries of magic. It is firmly Beginning at 10th leveI, when you cast an abjuration
established in the worlds of 0&0, with various spell that requires you to make an ability check as
traditions dedicated to its complex study. a part of casting that spell (as in counterspell and
dispel magic), you add your proficiency bonus to lhat
The most common arcane traditions in the multiverse ability check.
revolve around the schools of magic. Wizards through

PARl I (I <\SSfS

li


SPELL RESISTANCE object that you have seen. The object is visibly magical,
Starting at 14th leveI, you have advantage on saving radiating dim light out to 5 fee!.
throws against spells.
The object disappears after 1 hour, when you use this
Furthermore, you have resistance against the feature again, or if it takes any damage.
damage of spells.
BENIGN TRANSPOSITION
SCHOOL OF CONJURATION Starting at 6th leveI, you can use your action to teleport
up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space that you can see.
As a conjurer, you favor spells that produce objects Alternatively, you can choose a space within range
and creatures out of thin air. Vou can conjure billowing that is occupied by a Small or Medium creature. ]f that
clouds of killing fog or summon creatures from creature is willing, you both teleport, swapping places.
elsewhere to fight on your behalf. As your mastery
grows, you learn spells of transportation and can Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
teleport yourself across vast distances, even to other you finish a long rest or you cast a conjuration spell of
planes of existence, in an instan!. 1st levei or higher.

CONJURATION SAVANT FOCUSED CONJURATION
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd leveI, the Beginning at 10th leveI, while you are concentrating on
gold and time you must spend to copy a conjuration spell a conjuration spell, your concentration can't be broken
into your spellbook is halved. as a result of taking damage.

MINOR CONJURATION DURABLE SUMMONS
Starting at 2nd leveI when you select this school, you Starting at 14th leveI, any creature that you
can use your action to conjure up an inanimate object summon or create with a conjuration spell has 30
in your hand or on the ground in an unoccupied space temporary hit points.
that you can see within 10 feet of you. This object can be
no larger than 3 feet on a side and weigh no more than SCHOOL OF DIVINATION
10 pounds, and its form must be that of a nonmagical
The counsel of a diviner is sought by royalty and
commoners alike, for ali seek a clearer understanding
of the past, present, and future. As a diviner, you strive
to part the veils of space, time, and consciousness so
that you can see clearly. Vou work to master spells of
discernment, remote viewing, supernatural knowledge,
and foresight.

DIVINATION SAVANT
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy a divination spell
into your spellbook is halved.

PORTENT
Starting at 2nd levei when you choose this school,
glimpses of the future begin to press in on your
awareness. When you finish a long rest, roll two d20s
and record the numbers rolled. Vou can replace any
attack roll, saving throw, or ability check made by you or
a creature that you can see with one of these foretelling
rolls. Vou must choose to do so before the roll, and you
can replace a roll in this way only once per turno

Each foretelling roll can be used only once. When you
finish a long rest, you lose any unused foretelling rolls.

EXPERT DIVINATION
Beginning at 6th leveI, casting divination spells comes
so easily to you that it expends only a fraction of your
spellcasting efforts. When you cast a divination spell
of 2nd leveI or higher using a spell slot, you regain one
expended spell slo!. The slot you regain must be of a
levellower than the spell you cast and can't be higher
than 5th leveI.

THE THIRD EYE
Starting at 10th levei, you can use your action to
increase your powers of perception. When you do so,

PART I I CLASSES

116


choose one of the following benefits, which lasts until On a successful save, you can't use this feature on the
you are incapacitated or you take a short or long rest. attacker again until you finish a long rest.
Vou can't use the feature again until you finish a rest.
Vou must choose to use this feature before knowing
Darkvision. Vou gain darkvision out to a range of 60 whether the attack hits or misses. Creatures that can't
feet, as described in chapter 8. be charmed are immune to this effect.

Ethereal Si{jht. Vou can see into the Ethereal Plane SPLIT ENCHANTMENT
within 60 feet of you. Starting at 10th levei, when you cast an enchantment
spell of 1st levei or higher that targets only one creature,
Greater Comprehension. Vou can read any language. you can have it target a second creature.
See Invisibility. Vou can see invisible creatures and
objects within 10 feet of you that are within line of sight. ALTER MEMORIES
At 14th levei, you gain the ability to make a creature
GREATER PORTENT unaware of your magical influence on it. When you cast
Starting at 14th levei, the visions in your dreams an enchantment spell to charm one or more creatures,
intensify and paint a more accurate picture in your mind you can alter one creature's understanding so that it
of what is to come. Vou roll three d20s for your Portent remains unaware of being charmed.
feature, rather than two.
Additionally, once before the spell expires, you can
SCHOOLOFENCHANTMENT use your action lOtry to make the chosen creature
forget some of the time it spent charmed. The creature
As a member of the School of Enchantment, you have must succeed on an Intelligence saving throw against
honed your ability to magically entrance and beguile your wizard spell save DC or lose a number of hours
other people and monsters. Some enchanters are of its memories equal to 1 + your Charisma modifier
peacemakers who bewitch the violent to lay down their (minimum 1). Vou can make the creature forget less
arms and charm the cruel into showing mercy. Others time, and the amount of time can't exceed thc duration
are tyrants who magically bind the unwilling into their of your enchantment spell.
service. Most enchanters fall somewhere in between.
SCHOOL OF EVOCATION
ENCHANTMENT SAVANT
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the Vou focus your study on magic that creates powerful
gold and time you must spend to copy an enchantment elemental effects sue h as bitter cold, searing flame,
spell into your spellbook is halved. rolling thunder, crackling lightning, and burning acid.
Some evokers find employment in military forces,
HYPNOTIC GAZE serving as artillery to blast enemy armies from afar.
Starting at 2nd levei when you choose this school, your Others use their spectacular power to protect the weak,
soft words and enchanting gaze can magically enthrall while some seek their own gain as bandits, adventurers,
another creature. As an action, choose one creature that or aspiring tyrants.
you can see within 5 feet of you. ]f the target can see or
hear you, it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw EVOCATION SAVANT
against your wizard spell save DC or be charmed by you Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
until the end of your next turno The charmed creature's gold and time you must spend to copy an evocation spell
speed drops to O, and the creature is incapacitated and into your spellbook is halved.
visibly dazed.
SCULPT SPELLS
On subsequent turns, you can use your action to Beginning at 2nd levei, you can create pockets of
maintain this effect, extending its duration until the reIative safety within the effects of your evocation spclls.
end of your next turno However, the effect ends if you When you cast an evocation spell that affects other
move more than 5 feet away from the creature, if the creatures that you can see, you can choose a number
creature can neither see nor hear you, or if the creature
takes damage. of them equal to 1 + the spell's leveI. The chosen
creatures automatically succeed on their saving throws
Once the effect ends, or if the creature succeeds on its against the spell, and they take no damage if they would
initial saving throw against this effect, you can't use this normally take half damage on a successful save.
feature on that creature again until you finish a long rest.
POTENT CANTRIP
INSTINCTIVE CHARM Starting at 6th levei, your damaging cantrips affect
Beginning at 6th levei, when a creature you can see even creatures that avoid the brunt of the effect. When
within 30 feet of you makes an attack roll against a creature succeeds on a saving throw against your
you, you can use your reaction to divert the attack, cantrip, the creature takes half the cantrip's damage (if
provided that another creature is within the attack's any) but suffers no additional effect from the cantrip.
range. The attacker must make a Wisdom saving throw
against your wizard spell save De. On a failed save, EMPOWERED EVOCATION
the attacker must target the creature that is dosest Beginning at 10th leveI, you can add your Intelligence
lo il, not including you or itself. If multiple creatures modifier to the damage roll of any wizard evocation
are dosest, lhe attacker chooses which one to target. spell you cast.

PART I I CI ASSES

lI'


OVERCHANNEL choice. The cantrip doesn't count against your number
Starting at 14th levei, you can increase the power of of cantrips known.
your simpler spells. When you cast a wizard spell of
5th levei ar lower that deals damage, you can deal When you cast minar illusian, yau can create bath a
maximum damage with that spell. saund and an image with a single casting of the spell.

The first time you do so, you suffer no adverse effect. MALLEABLE ILLUSIONS
If you use this feature again before you finish a long Starting at 6th levei, when you cast an illusion spell that
rest, you take 2d 12 necrotic damage for each levei of has a duration of 1 minute or longer, you can use yaur
the spell, immediately after you cast it. Each time you action to change the nature of that illusion (using the
use this feature again before finishing a long rest, the spell's normal parameters for lhe illusion), provided that
necrotic damage per spelllevel increases by ldl2. This you can see the illusion.
damage ignores resistance and immunity.
ILLUSORY SELF
SCHOOL OF ILLUSION Beginning at 10th levei, you can create an illusory
duplicate of yourself as an instant, almost instinctual
Vou focus your studies on magic that dazzles the reaction to danger. When a creature makes an attack
senses, befuddles the mind, and tricks even the wisest roll against you, you can use your reaction to interpose
folk. Your magic is subtle, but the ilIusions crafted by the illusory duplicate between the attacker and
your keen mind make the impossible seem real. Some yourself. The attack automatically misses you, then the
illusionists-including many gnome wizards-are ilIusion dissipates.
benign tricksters who use their spells to entertain.
Others are more sinister masters of deception, using Once you use this feature, you can't use it again untU
their ilIusions to frighten and fool others for their you finish a short ar long rest.
personal gain.
ILLUSORY REALITY
ILLUSION SAVANT By 14th levei, you have learned the secret ofweaving
Beginning when you se1ect this school at 2nd levei, the shadow magic into your illusions to give them a semi-
gold and time you must spend to copy an illusion spell reality. When you cast an illusion spell of 1st levei or
into your spellbook is halved. higher, you can choose one inanimate, nonmagical
object that is part of the illusion and make that object
IMPROVED MINOR ILLUSION real. Vou can do this on your turn as a bonus action
When you choose this school at 2nd levei, you learn while the spell is ongoing. The object remains real for
the minor illusion cantrip. lf you already know this I minute. For example, you can create an illusion of a
cantrip, you learn a different wizard cantrip of your bridge over a chasm and then make it reallong enough
for your allies to cross.

The object can't deal damage or otherwise
directly harm anyone.

SCHOOL OF NECROMANCY

The School of Necromancy explores the cosmic forces
of life, death, and undeath. As you focus your studies in
this tradition, you learn to manipulate the energy that
animates allliving things. As you progress, you learn to
sap the life force fram a creature as your magic destrays
its bady, transforming that vital energy into magical
power you can manipulate.

Most people see necramancers as menacing, or even
villainous, due to the dose association with death.
Not all necramancers are evil, but the forces they
manipulate are considered taboo by many societies.

NECROMANCY SAVANT
Beginning when you se1ect this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy a necromancy
spell into your spellbook is halved.

GRIM HARVEST
At 2nd levei, you gain the ability to reap life energy from
creatures you kill with your spells. Once per turn when
you kill one ar more creatures with a spell of 1st levei
or higher, yau regain hit points equal to twice the spell's
levei, or three times its level if the spell belongs to the
School of Necramancy. Vou don't gain this benefit for
killing constructs or undead.

PART 1 I CLASSES

118


UNDEAD THRALLS you spend performing the procedure, you can transform
up to I cubic foot of material. After 1 hour, or until you
At 6th levei, you add the animate dead spell to your lose your concentration (as if you were concentrating on
spellbook if it is not there already, When you cast a spell), the material reverts to its original substance.
animate dead, you can target one additional corpse
or pile of bones, creating another zombie or ske1eton, TRANSMUTER'S STONE
as appropriate,
Starting at 6th levei, you can spend 8 hours creating a
Whenever you create an undead using a necromancy transmuter's stone that stores transmutation magic. Vou
spell, it has additional benefits: can benefit from the stone yourself or give it to another
creature. A creature gains a benefit of your choice
The creature's hit point maximum is increased byan as long as the stone is in the creature's possession.
amount equal to your wizard leveI. When you create the stone, choose the benefit from the
The creature adds your proficiency bonus to its following options:
weapon damage rolls,
Darkvision out to a range of 60 feet, as described in
INURED TO UNDEATH chapter 8
An increase to speed of lO feet while the creature is
Beginning at 10th levei, you have resistance to necrotic unencumbered
damage, and your hit point maximum can't be reduced. Proficiency in Constitution saving throws
Vou have spent so much time dealing with undead and Resistance to acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder
the forces that animate them that you have become damage (your choice whenever you choose this
inured to some of their worst effects. benefit)

COMMAND UNDEAD Each time you cast a transmutation spell of I st levei
or higher, you can change the effect of your stone if the
Starting at 14th levei, you can use magic to bring stone is on your person.
undead under your control, even those created by other
wizards. As an action, you can choose one undead that If you create a new transmuter's stone, the previous
you can see within 60 feet of you. That creature must one ceases to function.
make a Charisma saving throw against your wizard
spell save DC. If it succeeds, you can't use this feature SHAPECHANGER
on it again. If it fails, it becomes friendly to you and
obeys your commands until you use this feature again. At 10th levei, you add the polymorph spell to your
spellbook, if it is not there already. Vou can cast
Intelligent undead are harder to control in this way. polymorph without expending a spell slot. When you
If the target has an Intelligence of 8 or higher, it has do so, you can target only yourself and transform into a
advantage on the saving throw. If it fails the saving beast whose challenge rating is 1 or lower.
throw and has an Intelligence of 12 or higher, it can
repeat the saving throw at the end of every hour until it Once you cast polymorph in this way, you can't do so
succeeds and breaks free. again until you finish a short or long rest, though you
can still cast it normally using an available spell slot.
SCHOOL OF TRANSMUTATION
MASTER TRANSMUTER
Vou are a student of spells that modify energy and matler.
To you, the world is not a fixed thing, but eminently Starting at 14th levei, you can use your action to
mutable, and you delight in being an agent of change. consume the reserve of transmutation magic slored
Vou wield the raw stuff of creation and learn to alter both within your transmuter's stone in a single burst. When
physical forms and mental qualities. Your magic gives you do so, choose one of the following effects. Your
you the tools to become a smith on reality's forge. transmuter's stone is destroyed and can'l be remade
until you finish a long rest.
Some transmuters are tinkerers and pranksters,
turning people into toads and transforming copper into M'lÍor Transfarmatian. Vou can transmute one
silver for fun and occasional profit. Others pursue their nonmagical object-no larger than a 5.fool cube-inlo
magical studies with deadly seriousness, seeking the another nonmagical object of similar size and mass and
power of the gods to make and destroy worlds. of equal or lesse r value. Vou must spend 10 minutes
handling the object lOlransform it.
TRANSMUTATION SAVANT
Panacea. Vou remove ali curses, diseases, and poisons
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the affecting a crealure that you touch with the transmuter's
gold and time you must spend to copy a transmutation stone. The creature also regains ali its hit points.
spell into your spellbook is halved.
Restare Life. Vou cast the raise dead spell on a
MINaR ALCHEMY creature you touch with the transmuter's stone, without
expending a spell si 01 or needing to have the spell in
Starting at 2nd levei when you select this school, you your spellbook.
can temporarily alter the physical properties of one
nonmagical object, changing it from one substance into Restare Yauth. Vou touch the transmuter's stone to
another. Vou perform a special alchemical procedure a willing creature, and that creature's apparent age is
on one object composed entire1y of wood, stone (but not reduced by 3dlO years, to a minimum of 13 years. This
a gemstone), iron, copper, or silver, transforming it into effect doesn't extend lhe creature's lifespan.
a different one of those materiais. For each 10 minutes

NRT J CLASSES

"9


CHAPTER 4: PERSONALITY AND BACKGROUND

~ HARACTERS ARE DEFINED BY MUCH MORE THAN Vou don't need to be confined to binary notions of
their race and c1ass. They're individuais with sex and gender. The elf god Corellon Larethian is often
their own stories, interests, connections, and seen as androgynous or hermaphroditic, for example,
capabilities beyond those that c1ass and race and some elves in the multiverse are made in Corellon's
define. This chapter expounds on the details image. Vou could also play a female character who
that distinguish characters from one another, presents herself as a man, a man who feels trapped in a
female body, or a bearded female dwarf who hates being
including the basics of name and physical description, mistaken for a male. Likewise, your character's sexual
the rules of backgrounds and languages, and the finer orientation is for you to decide.
points of personality and alignment.
HEIGHT AND WEIGHT
CHARACTER DETAILS
Vou can decide your character's height and weight,
Your character's name and physical description might using the information provided in your race description
be the first things that the other players at the table or on the Random Height and Weight table. Think about
learn about you. !t's worth thinking about how these what your character's ability scores might say about his
characteristics reflect the character you have in mind. or her height and weight. A weak but agile character
might be thin. A strong and tough character might be
NAME tall or just heavy.

Your character's race description includes sample If you want to, you can roll randomly for your
names for members of that race. Put some thought into character's height and weight using the Random Height
your name even if you're just picking one from a list. and Weight table. The dice roll given in the Height
Modifier column determines the character's extra
SEX height (in inches) beyond the base height. That same
number multiplied by the dice roll or quantity given in
Vou can play a male or female character without gaining the Weight Modifier column determines the character's
any special benefits or hindrances. Think about how extra weight (in pounds) beyond the base weight.
your character does or does not conform to the broader
cu!ture's expectations of sex, gender, and sexual RANOOM HEICHT ANO WEICHT
behavior. For example, a male drow c1eric defies the
traditional gender divisions of drow society, which could Race Base Height Base Weight
be a reason for your character to leave that society and Human Height Modifier Weight Modifier
come to the surface. Dwarf, hill 4'8" +2d10 1101b. x (2d4) Ib.
Dwarf, mountain 3'8" +2d4 1lS Ib. x (2d6) Ib.
••• ••• Elf, high 4' +2d4 130Ib. x (2d6) Ib.
Elf, wood 4'6" +2d10 901b. x (ld4) Ib.
TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: CONTRASTING CHARACTERS Elf, drow 4'6" +2d10 1001b. x (ld4) Ib.
Halfling 4'5" +2d6 751b. x (ld6) Ib.
The details in this chapter make a big difference in setting Dragonborn 2'7" +2d4 351b. xllb.
your character apart from every other character. Consider the Gnome 5'6" +2d8 1751b. x (2d6) Ib.
Half-elf 2'11" +2d4 351b. xl Ib.
following two human fighters. Half-orc 4'9" +2d8 1101b. x (2d4) Ib.
Hailing from the Dragonlance setting, Tika Waylan was a Tiefling 4'10" +2d10 1401b. x (2d6) Ib.
4'9" +2d8 1101b. x (2d4) Ib.
brash teenager who had a rough childhood. The daughter of
a thief, she ran away from home and practiced her father's
trade on the streets of Solace. When she tried to rob the
proprietor of the Inn of the Last Home, he caught her and
took her under his wing, giving her a job as a barmaid. Sut
when the dragonarmies laid waste to the town ofSolace
and destroyed the inn, necessity forced Tika into adventure
alongside the friends she'd known from her childhood. Her

skill as a fighter (a frying pan remains one ofher favorite For example, as a human, Tika has a height of 4 feet 8
weapons) combined with her history on the streets gave her inches plus 2dlO inches. Her player rolls 2dlO and gets
skills invaluable in her adventuring career. a total of 12, so Tika stands 5 feet 8 inches tal I. Then
the player uses that same roll of 12 and multiplies it by
Artemis Entrer; grew up on the streets of Calimport in the 2d4 pounds. Her 2d4 roll is 3, so Tika weighs an extra
Forgotten Realms. He used his wits, strength, and agility 36 pounds (12 x 3) on top of her base 110 pounds, for a
to carve out his own territory in one of the city's hundreds total of 146 pounds.
of poor shanty towns. After several years, he attracted the
notice of one ofthe most powerful thieves' guilds in the city, OTHER PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
and he ascended the ranks ofthe guild quickly despite his
youth. Artemis became the favored assassin of one ofthe Vou choose your character's age and the color of
city's pashas, who sent him to far-off Icewind Dale to recover his or her hair, eyes, and skin. To add a touch of
some stolen gems. He's a professional killer, constantly distinctiveness, you might want to give your character
challenging himselfto improve his skills. an unusual or memorable physical characteristic, such
as a scar, a limp, or a tatlOo.
Tika and Artemis are both human and both fighters (with
some experience as rogues), possessing similarly high
Strength and Dexterity scores, but there the similarity ends.

•• ••

PAR r 1 IPI' RSONAIITY.\ D BACKGROU U 121


•• CHARACTER DETAILS •• doing what seems best at the time. Lizardfolk, most
druids, and many humans are neutra!.
TIKA AND ARTEMIS:
Chaotic neutral (CN) creatures follow their whims,
Consider how the names Tika Waylan and Artemis Entreri holding their personal freedom above ali else.
set these characters apart from each other and refiect their Many barbarians and rogues, and some bards, are
personalities. Tika is a young woman determined to prove chaotie neutra!.
that she's not just a kid any more, and her name makes her
sound young and ordinary. Artemis Entreri comes from an Lawful evil (LE) creatures methodically take what they
want, within the limits of acode of tradition, loyalty, or
exotic land and carries a more mysterious name. order. Devils, blue dragons, and hobgoblins are Jawful evil.
Tika is nineteen years old at the start of her adventuring
Neutral evil (NE) is the alignment of those who do
career and has aubum hair, green eyes, fair skin with freckles, whatever they can get away with, without compassion or
and a mole on her right hip. Artemis is a small man, compact qualms. Many drow, some e10ud giants, and yugoloths
and ali wiry muscle. He has angular features and high are neutra I evi!.
cheekbones, and he always seems in need of a shave. His
raven.black hair is thick and full, but his eyes are gray and Chaotic evil (CE) creatures act with arbitrary
violence, spurred by their greed, hatred, or bloodlust.
......I•if.ele-ss--bet-ray-ing--t-he-em-pt-ines-s -o-f h-is -life-an-d -sou-I.--- Demons, red dragons, and orcs are chaotie evil.

ALIGNMENT ALIGNMENT IN THE MULTIVERSE

A typical creature in the worlds of DUNGEONS& For many thinking creatures, alignment is a moral
DRAGONShas an alignment, which broadly describes choice. Humans, dwarves, e1ves, and other humanoid
its moral and personal attitudes. Alignment is a races can choose whether to follow the paths of good or
combinalion of two factors: one identifies morality evil, law or chaos. According to myth, the good-aligned
(good, evil, or neutra I), and the olher describes gods who created these races gave them free will to
altitudes toward society and order (Iawful, chaotie, choose their moral paths, knowing that good without
or neutral). Thus, nine distinct alignments define the free will is slavery.
possible combinations.
The evil deities who created other races, though, made
These brief summaries of the nine alignments those races to serve them. Those races have strong
describe the typical behavior of a creature with that inborn tendencies that match the nature of their gods.
alignment. Individuais might vary significantly from Most orcs share the violent, savage nature of the orc
that typical behavior, and few people are perfectly and god, Gruumsh. and are thus inelined toward evil. Even if
consistently faithful to the precepts of their alignment. an orc chooses a good alignment, it struggles against its
innate tendencies for its entire life. (Even half-orcs feel
Lawful good (LG) creatures can be counted on to do the lingering pull of the orc god's influence.)
the right thing as expected by society. Gold dragons,
paladins, and most dwarves are lawful good. Alignment is an essential pari of the nature of
celestiaIs and fiends. A devil does not choose to be
Neutral good (NG) folk do the best they can to help lawful evil, and it doesn't tend toward lawful evil, but
others according to their needs. Many celestiais, some rather it is lawful evil in its essence. If it somehow
e10ud giants, and most gnomes are neutral good. ceased to be lawful evil, it would cease to be a devil.

Chaotic good (CG) creatures act as their conscience Most creatures that lack the capacity for rational
directs, with little regard for what others expect. Copper thought do nol have alignments-they are unaligned.
dragons, many elves, and unicorns are chaotie good. Such a creature is incapable of making a moral or
ethical choice and acts according to its bestial nature.
Lawful neutra I (LN) individuais act in accordance Sharks are savage predators, for example, but they are
with law, tradition, or personal codes. Many monks and not evil; they have no alignment.
some wizards are lawful neutra!.

Neutral (N) is the alignment of those who prefer to
steer e1ear of moral questions and don't take sides,

DWARVISH SCRIPT: SAMPLE ALPHABET

I.

A BC DE FGH I J K LM

< T ] "J ~ Ir 11 + 1 :J ~ Y P

NO p Q R S T UVWX y Z

V t) r I ~ ~ r ~ '11 ~ ~ n ~

122 PART I I PERSONALlTY AND BACKGROUND


""TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: ALIGNMENT •••

LANGUAGES

Your race indicates the languages your character can Tika Waylan is neutral good, fundamentally good-hearted
and striving to help others where she cano Artemis is lawful
speak by default, and your background might give you evil, unconcerned with the value of sentient life but at least
professional in his approach to murder.
access to one or more additionallanguages Df your
As an evil character, Artemis is not an ideal adventurer. He
choice. Note these languages on your character sheet. began his career as a villain, and only cooperates with heroes
when he must-and when it's in his own best interests. In
Choose your languages from the Standard Languages most games, evil adventurers cause problems in groups
alongside others who don't share their interests and objectives.
table, or choose one that is common in your campaign. Generally, evil alignments are for villains and monsters.

With your DM's permission, you can instead choose a ~~

language from the Exotic Languages table or a secret

language, such as thieves' cant or the tongue Df druids.

Some Df these languages are actually families

Df languages with many dialects. For example, the PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS

Primordiallanguage includes the Auran, Aquan, Ignan, Fleshing out your character's personality-the array Df
traits, mannerisms, habits, beliefs, and flaws that give
and Terran dialects, one for each Df the four elemental a person a unique identity-will help you bring him
or her to life as you play the game. Four categories Df
planes. Creatures that speak different dialects Df the characteristics are presented here: personality traits,
ideais, bonds, and flaws. Beyond those categories,
same language can communicate with one another. think about your character's favorite words or phrases,
tics and habitual gestures, vices and pet peeves, and
STANDARD LANCUACES Seript whatever else you can imagine.
Common
Language Typieal Speakers Dwarvish Each background presented later in this chapter
Common Humans Elvish includes suggested characteristics that you can use
Dwarvish Dwarves Dwarvish to spark your imagination. You're not bound to those
Elvish Elves Dwarvish options, but they're a good starting point.
Giant Ogres, giants Dwarvish
Gnomish Gnomes Common PERSONALITY TRAITS
Goblin Goblinoids Dwarvish Give your character two personality traits. Personality
Halfling Halflings traits are small, simple ways to help you set your
Ore Ores character apart from every other character. Your
personality traits should tell you something interesting
EXOTIC LANCUAGES and fun about your character. They should be self.
descriptions that are specific about what makes your
Language Typical Speakers Seript character stand out. "I'm smart" is not a good trait,
Abyssal Demons Infernal because it describes a lot Df characters. "!'ve read every
Celestial Celestiais Celestial book in Candlekeep" tells you something specific about
Draconic Dragons, Draconic your character's interests and disposition.
dragonborn
Deep Speech Mind flayers, Infernal Personality traits might describe the things your
beholders Dwarvish character likes, his or her past accomplishments, things
Infernal Devils Elvish your character dislikes or fears, your character's sei f-
Primordial Elementals Elvish attitude or mannerisms, or the influence Df his or her
Sylvan Fey creatures ability scores.
Undercommon Underdark traders

ELVISH SCRIPT: SAM PLE ALPHABET

A B C DE FGH I J K LM

() O a S (J ( r6 !J 1 cf ri fJ (lJ

w

Nop Q RS T UVWx y z

dc) (9 -

1 J(j{ if :(
() ff) IC fj (9

PART 1 J PERSONALllY ANO BACKGROlJ I.)

123


Ah

TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS IDEALS

Tika and Artemis have distinct personality traits. Tika Waylan Describe one ideal that drives your character. Your ideais
dislikes boastfulness and has a fear of heights resulting are the things that you believe in most strongly, the
from a bad fali during her career as a thief. Artemis Entreri fundamental moral and ethical principies that compel you
is always prepared for the worst and moves with a quick, to act as you do. Ideais encompass everything from your
precise confidence. life goals to your core belief system.

Consider their ideais. Tika Waylan is innocent, almost Ideais might answer any of these questions: What are
childlike, believing in the value oflife and the importance of the principies that you will neve r betray? What would
appreciating everyone. Neutral good in alignment, she c1eaves prompt you to make sacrifices? What drives you to act
to ideais of life and respec!. Artemis Entreri never allows and guides your goals and ambitions? What is the single
his emotions to master him, and he constantly challenges most important thing you strive for?
himself to improve his skills. His lawful evil alignment gives
him ideais of impartiality and a lust for power. Vou can choose any ideais you like, but your
character's alignment is a good place to start defining
Tika Waylan's bond is to the Inn ofthe Last Home. The them. Each background in this chapter includes six
inn's proprietor gave her a new chance at life, and her suggested ideais. Five of them are linked to aspects of
friendship with her adventuring companions was forged alignment: law, chaos, good, evit, and neutrality. The last
during her time working there. Its destruction by the one has more to do with the particular background than
marauding dragonarmies gives Tika a very personal reason to with moral or ethical perspectives.
hate them with a fiery passion. Her bond might be phrased
as "I will do whatever it takes to punish the dragonarmies for BONDS
the destruction ofthe Inn ofthe Last Home." Create one bond for your character. Bonds represent a
character's connections to people, places, and events in
Artemis Entreri's bond is a strange, almost paradoxical the world. They tie you to things from your background.
relationship with Drizzt Do'Urden, his equal in swordplay They might inspire you to heights of heroism, or lead
and grim determination. In his first battle with Drizzt, you to act against your own best interests if they are
Artemis recognized something of himself in his opponent, threatened. They can work very much like ideaIs,
some indication that if his life had gone differently, he driving a character's motivations and goals.
might have led a life more like the heroic drow's. From that
Bonds might answer any of these questions: Whom do
moment, Artemis is more than a criminal assassin-he is an you care most about? To what place do you feeI a special
connection? What is your most treasured possession?
antihero, driven by his rivalry with Drizz!. His bond might be
phrased as "I will not rest untill have proved myselfbetter Your bonds might be tied to your c1ass, your
than Drizzt Do'Urden." background, your race, or some other aspect of your
character's history or personality. Vou might also gain
Each of these characters also has an important flaw. new bonds over the course of your adventures.

Tika Waylan is naive and emotionally vulnerable, younger FLAWS

than her companions and annoyed that they still think Finally, choose a flaw for your character. Your
character's flaw represents some vice, compulsion, fear,
of her as the kid they knew years ago. She might even be or weakness-in particular, anything that someone
e1se could exploit to bring you to ruin ar cause you to
tempted to act against her principies if she's convinced that act against your best interests. More significant than
nega tive personality traits, a flaw might answer any
a particular achievement would demonstrate her maturity. of these questions: What enrages you? What's the one
person, concept, or event that you are terrified of? What
Artemis Entreri is completely walled offfrom any personal are your vices?

relationship and just wants to be left alone. ,.

~

A useful place to start thinking about personality
traits is to look at your highest and lowest ability scores
and define one trait related to each. Either one could be
positive or nega tive: you might work hard to overcome a
low score, for example, or be cocky about your high score.

DRACONIC SCRIPT: SAMPLE ALPHABET

A BC DE FGH I J K LM

lf ~ T 1•r ~ 'f 7 ,
t f- V'-
1 "}

NO p Q R S T UVW X Y Z

t ,-r 0-- W "'J 1ff ::). ~ f 1f V J'"

PART I I PERSONALITY ANO BACKCROUND

124


INSPIRATION The sample backgrounds in this chapter provide
both concrete benetits (features, proticiencies, and
Inspiration is a rule the Dungeon Master can use to languages) and roleplaying suggestions.
reward you for playing your character in a way that's
true to his or her personality traits, ideal, bond, and flaw. PROFICIENCIES
By using inspiration, you can draw on your personality Each background gives a character proticiency in two
trait of compassion for the downtrodden to give you skills. SkilIs are described in chapter 7.
an edge in negotiating with the Beggar Prince. Or
inspiration can let you calI on your bond to the defense In addition, most backgrounds give a character
of your home village to push past the effect of a spelI proticiency with one or more tools. Tools and tool
that has been laid on you. proticiencies are detailed in chapter 5.

GAINING INSPIRATION If a character would gain the same proticiency from
two different sources, he or she can choose a different
Your DM can choose to give you inspiration for a variety proticiency of the same kind (skilI or tool) instead.
of reasons. TypicalIy, DMs award it when you play
out your personality traits, give in to the drawbacks LANGUAGES
presented by a flaw or bond, and otherwise portray your Some backgrounds also alIow characters to learn
character in a compelIing way. Your DM wilI telI you additional languages beyond those given by race.
how you can earn inspiration in the game. See "Languages" earlier in this chapter.

Vou either have inspiration or you don't-you can't EQUIPMENT
stockpile multi pie "inspirations" for later use. Each background provides a package of starting
equipmcnt. lf you use the optional rule from chapter 5
USING INSPIRATION to spend coin on gear, you do not receive the starting
equipment from your background.
lf you have inspiration, you can expend it when you make
an attack rolI, saving throw, or ability check. Spending SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
your inspiration gives you advantage on that rol!. A background contains suggested personal
characleristics based on your background. Vou can
AdditionalIy, if you have inspiration, you can reward pick characteristics, rolI dice to determine
another player for good roleplaying, e1ever thinking, them randomly, or use the suggestions
or simply doing something exciting in the game. as inspiration for characteristics of
When another player characler does somelhing that your own creation.
realIy contributes to the story in a fun and interesting
way, you can give up your inspiration to give lhat CUSTOMIZING A
characler inspiration. BACKGROUND
Vou might want to tweak
BACKGROUNDS some of the features of a
background so it better
Every story has a beginning. Your character's tits your character
background reveals where you carne from, how you or the campaign
beca me an adventurer, and your place in the world. setting. To customize
Your tighter might have been a courageous knight or a a background, you can
grizzled soldier. Your wizard could have been a sage or replace one feature
an artisan. Your rogue might have gotten by as a guild with any other one,
thief or commanded audiences as a jester. choose any two
skills, and choose
Choosing a background provides you with important a total of two to01
story cues about your character's identity. The most proticiencies or
important question to ask about your background is languages from the
what changed? Why did you stop doing whatever your sample backgrounds.
background describes and start adventuring? Where Vou can either use
did you get the money to purchase your starting gear, or, the equipment
if you come from a wealthy background, why don't you package from your
have more money? How did you learn the skills of your background or spend
e1ass? What sets you apart from ordinary people who coin on gear as
share your background? described in chapter
5. (lf you spend
4, coin, you can't also
take the equipment
TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: BACKCROUNOS package suggestcd
for your c1ass.)
Tika Waylan and Artemis Entreri bolh lived lheir earliest years FinalIy, choose
as street urchins. Tika's later career as a barmaid didn't really two personality
change her, so she might choose the urchin background,
gaining proficiency in the Sleight of Hand and Stealth skills.

and learning the tools ofthe thieving trade. Artemis is more

defined by his criminal background, giving him skills in
Deception and Steallh, as well as proficiency wilh lhe tools of
lhievery and poison .

.r•-•-•-------------------JI"-


traits, one ideal. one bond, and one flaw. lfyou can't find d8 Personality Trail
a feature that matches your desired background, work 1 I idolize a parlicular hero of my faith, and conslanlly
with your DM to create one.
refer lo Ihal person's deeds and example,
ACOLYTE 2 I can find common ground belween lhe fiercesl

Vou have spent your life in the service of a temple enemies, empalhizing wilh Ih em and always working
to a specific god or pantheon of gods, Vou act as an loward peace.
intermediary between the realm of the holy and the 3 I see omens in every evenl and aclion. lhe gods Iry lo
mortal world, performing sacred rites and offering speak lo uso we jusl need lo lislen
sacrifices in order to conduct worshipers into the 4 NOlhing can shake my oplimislic altilude.
presence of the divine. Vou are not necessarily a S I quole (or misquole) sacred lexls and proverbs in
cleric-performing sacred rites is not the same thing aS almost every situation.
channeling divine power. 6 I am loleranl (or inloleranl) of olher failhs and respecl
(or condemn) lhe worship of olher gods.
Choose a god, a pantheon of gods, or some other 7 I've enjoyed fine food, drink, and high society among
quasi-divine being from among those listed in appendix my temple's elite. Rough living grates on me.
B or those specified by your DM, and work with your 8 I've spenl so long in the tem pie that I have liltle
DM to detail the nature of your religious service. practical experience dealing with people in the outside
Were you a lesser functionary in a temple, raised from world.
childhood to assist the priests in the sacred rites? Or
were you a high priest who suddenly experienced a call d6 Ideal
to serve your god in a different way? Perhaps you were 1 Tradilion. lhe aneient traditions of worship and
the leader of a small cult outside of any established
tem pIe structure, or even an occult group that served a sacrifice must be preserved and upheld. (Lawful)
fiendish master that you now deny. 2 Charily. I always try to help those in need, no matter

Skill Proficiencies: Insight, Religion what the personal cosI. (Good)
Languages: Two of your choice Change. We must help bring aboullhe changes lhe
Equiprnent: A holy symbol (a gift to you when you gods are constantly working in the world. ((haotic)
4 Power. I hope to one day rise to the top of my failh's
entered the priesthood), a prayer book or prayer religious hierarchy. (Lawful)
wheel, 5 sticks of incense, vestments, a set of common S Failh. I trust that my deity will guide my aclions. I have
clothes, and a belt pouch containing 15 gp faith that if I work hard, things will go well. (Lawful)
6 Aspiralion. I seek lo prove myself worthy of my god's
FEATURE: SHELTER OF THE FAITHFUL favor by matching my actions againsl his or her
As an acolyte, you command the respect of those who teachings. (Any)
share your faith, and you can perform the religious
ceremonies of your deity. You and your adventuring d6 Bond
companions can expect to receive free healing and 1 I would die lo recover an ancient relic of my faith that
care at a temple, shrine, or other established presence
of your faith, though you must provide any material was lost long ago.
components needed for spells. Those who share 2 I will someday get revenge on the corrupt temple
your religion will support you (but only you) at a
modest lifestyle. hierarchy who branded me a heretic.
3 I owe my life to the priest who took me in when my
Vou might also have ties to a specific tem pIe dedicated
to your chosen deity or pantheon, and you have a parenls died.
residence there, This could be the temple where you 4 Everylhing I do is for the common people.
used to serve, if you remain on good terms with it, or a S I will do anylhing lo prolect the tem pie where I served.
temple where you have found a new home, While near 6 I seek to preserve a sacred text that my enemies
your temple. you can call upon the priests for assistance.
provided the assistance you ask for is not hazardous and consider heretical and seek to destroy.
you remain in good standing with your temple.
d6 Flaw
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Acolytes are shaped by their experience in temples 1 I judge olhers harshly, and myself even more severely.
or other religious communities. Their study of the 2 I pulloo much Irusl in Ihose who wield power wilhin
history and tenets of their faith and their relationships
to temples, shrines, or hierarchies affect their my lemple's hierarchy.
mannerisms and ideaIs. Their flaws might be some 3 My piely somelimes leads me lo blindly Irusllhose
hidden hypocrisy or heretical idea, or an ideal or bond
taken to an extreme. that profess failh in my god.
4 Iam inflexible in my Ihinking.
5 I am suspicious af strangers and expect the worst cf

them.
6 Once I pick a goal, I become obsessed wilh it to the

detriment of everylhing else in my life.

P.\.l{f 11 PERSONAIITY D B \( KGROU. O

127


CHARLATAN d8 Personality Trait
1 I fali in and out of love easily, and am always pursuing
Vou have always had a way with people. Vou know
what makes them tick. you can tease out their hearts' someone.
desires after a few minutes of conversation, and with a 2 I have a joke for every occasion, especially occasions
few leading questions you can read them like they were
children's books. !t's a useful talent, and one that you're where humor is inappropriate.
perfectly willing to use for your advantage. 3 Flattery is my preferred trick for getting what I want,
4 I'm a born gambler who can't resist taking a risk for a
Vou know what people want and you deliver. or rather,
you promise to deliver. Common sense should steer potential payoff.
people away from things that sound toa good to be true, S I lie about almost everything. even when there's no
but common sense seems to be in short supply when
you're around. The bottle of pink-colored liquid will good reason to.
surely cure that unseemly rash, this ointment-nothing 6 Sarcasm and insults are my weapons of choice.
more than a bit of fat with a sprinkle of silver dust-can 7 I keep multiple holy symbols on me and invoke
restore youth and vigor, and there's a bridge in the city
thatjust happens to be for sale. These marvels sound whatever deity might come in useful at any given
implausible, but you make them sound like the real dea!. momento
8 I pocket anything I see that might have some value.
Skill Proficiencies: Deception, Sleight of Hand
Too! Proficiencies: Disguise kit, forgery kit d6 Ideal
Equiprnent: A set of fine c1othes, a disguise kit, tools 1 Independence. I am a free spirit-no one tells me what

of the con of your choice (ten stoppered bottles filled to do. ((haotic)
with colored liquid, a set of weighted dice, a deck of 2 Fairness. I never target people who can't afford to lose
marked cards, or a signet ring of an imaginary duke).
and a belt pouch containing 15 gp a few coins. (Lawful)
3 Charity. I distribute the money I acquire to the people
FAVORITE SCHEMES
Every charlatan has an angle he or she uses in who really need it. (Good)
preference to other schemes. Choose a favorite scam or 4 Creativity. I never run the same con twice. ((haotic)
roll on the table below. S Friendship. Material goods come and go. Bonds of

d6 Scam friendship last forever, (Good)
1 I cheat at games of chance. 6 Aspiration. I'm determined to make something
2 I shave coins or forge documents.
3 I insinuate myselfinto people's lives to prey on their of myself. (Any)

weakness and secure their fortunes. d6 Bond
4 I put on new identities like clothes. 1 I fleeced the wrong person and must work to ensure
S I run sleight-of.hand cons on street corners.
6 I convince people that worthless junk is worth their that this individual never crosses paths with me or
those I care about.
hard.earned money. 2 I owe everything to my mentor-a horrible person
who's probably rotting in jail somewhere.
FEATURE: FALSE IDENTITY 3 Somewhere out there, I have a child who doesn't
Vou have created a second identity that includes know me. I'm making the world better for him or her.
documentation, established acquaintallces, and 4 I come frem a noble family, and one day 1'11reelaim my
disguises that allow you to assume that persona. lands and title from those who stole them from me.
Additionally, you can forge documents including official S A powerful person killed someone I love. Some day
papers and personal letters, as long as you have seen an soon, 1'11have my revenge.
example of the kind of document or the handwriting you 6 I swindled and ruined a person who didn't deserve il. I
are trying to copy. seek to atone for my misdeeds but might never be able
to forgive myself.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Charlatans are colorful characters who conceal their d6 Flaw
true selves behind the masks they construcl. They 1 I can't resist a pretty face.
reflect what people want to see, what they want to 2 I'm always in debt. I spend my ill.gotten gains on
believe, and how they scc the world. But their true
sclves are sometimes plagued by an uneasy conscience, decadent luxuries faster than I bring them in..
a n old enemy, or deep-seated trust issues. 3 I'm convinced that no one could ever fool me the way

PART 1 I PERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROUNO I fool others.
4 I'm too greedy for my own good. I can'! resist taking a
128
risk if there's money involved.
S I can'! resist swindling people who are more powerful

than me.
6 I hate to admit it and will hate myself for it, but 1'11run

and preserve my own hide if the going gets tough.


CRIMINAL d6 Ideal
1 Honor. I don't steal from others in the trade. (Lawful)
Vou are an experienced criminal wilh a hislory of 2 Freedom. (hains are meant to be broken, as are those
breaking lhe law. Vou have spenl a 101of lime among
olher criminais and still have conlacls wilhin lhe who would forge them. ((haotie)
criminal underworld. You're far closer lhan mosl people 3 Charity. I steal from the wealthy so that I ean help
lo lhe world of murder, lhefl, and violence lhal pervades
lhe underbelly of civilizalion, and you have survived up lo people in need. (Good)
lhis poinl by f10uling lhe rules and regulalions of sociely. 4 Greed. I will do whatever it takes to beco me

Skill Proficiencies: Deceplion, Slealth wealthy. (Evil)
Tool Proficiencies: One lype of gaming seI, 5 People. I'm loyal to my friends, not to any ideais, and

lhieves' lools everyone else ean lake a trip down the Styx for ali I
Equiprnent: A crowbar, a seI of dark common clolhes eare. (Neutral)
6 Redemption. There's a spark of good in everyone.
including a hood, and a bell pouch conlaining 15 gp (Good)

CRIMINAL SPECIALTY d6 Bond
There are many kinds of criminais, and wilhin a lhieves' 1 I'm trying to pay o f!' an old debt I owe to a generous
guild or similar criminal organizalion, individual
members have particular speciallies. Even criminais benefaetor.
who operale oulside of such organizalions have slrong 2 My ill.gotten gains go to support my family.
preferences for cerlain kinds of crimes over olhers. 3 Something important was laken from me, and I aim to
Choose lhe role you played in your criminallife, or roll
on lhe lable below. sleal it baek.
4 I will beeome the greatest thief that ever lived.
d8 Specialty d8 Specialty 5 I'm guilty of a lerrible crime. I hope I ean redeem
1 Blaekmailer 5 Highway robber
2 Burglar 6 Hired killer myself for it.
3 Enforeer 7 Piekpocket 6 Someone I loved died beeause of I mistake I made.
4 Fenee 8 Smuggler
Thal will never happen again.

FEATURE: CRIMINAL CONTACT
Vou have a reliable and lruslworlhy conlacl who acls as
your liaison lo a network of olher criminais. Vou know
how lo gel messages lo and from your conlacl, even
over greal dislances; specifically, you know lhe local
messengers, corrupl caravan maslers, and seedy sailors
who can deliver messages for you.

SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Criminais mighl seem like villains on lhe surface,
and many of lhem are villainous lO lhe core. Sut some
have an abundance of endearing, if nol redeeming,
characlerislics. There mighl be honor among lhieves, bul
criminais rarely show any respecl for law or aUlhorily.

d8 Personality Trait
1 I always have a plan for whal to do when lhings go

wrong.
2 I am always ealm, no maller what the situation. I never

raise my voice ar let my emotions control me.
3 The firsl thing I do in a new plaee is note the loeations

of everything valuable-or where sueh things eould be
hidden.
4 I would rather make a new friend than a new enemy.
5 I am ineredibly slow to trust. Those who seem lhe
fairest often have the most to hide.
6 I don't pay attention to the risks in a siluation. Never
tell me the odds.
7 The best way to get me to do something is to tell me I
ean't do it.
8 I blow up at the slightest insult.


d6 Flaw ENTERTAINER
1 When I see something valuable, I can't think about
Vou thrive in front of an audience. Vou know how to
anything but how to steal it. entrance them, entertain them, and even inspire them.
2 When faced with a choice between money and my Your poetics can stir the hearts of those who hear you,
awakening grief or joy, laughter or anger. Your music
friends, I usually choose the money. raises their spirits or captures their sorrow. Your dance
3 If there's a plan, 1'11 forget it. If I don't forget it, 1'11 steps captivate, your humor cuts to the quick. Whatever
techniques you use, your art is your life.
ignore il.
4 I have a "tell" that reveals when I'm Iying. Skill Proficiencies: Acrobatics, Performance
S I tum tail and run when things look bad. Tool Proficiencies: Disguise kit, one type of
6 An innocent person is in prison for a crime that I
musical instrument
committed. I'm okay with that. Equiprnent: A musical instrument (one of your choice),

VARIANT CRIMINAL: Spy the favor of an admirer (love lelter, lock of hair, or
Although your capabilities are not much different trinket), a costume, and a belt pouch containing 15 gp
from those of a burglar or smuggler, you learned
and practiced them in a very different context: as an ENTERTAINER ROUTINES
espionage agenl. Vou might have been an officially A good entertainer is versatile, spicing up every
sanctioned agent of the crown, or perhaps you sold the performance with a variety of different routines. Choose
secrets you uncovered to the highest bidder. one to three routines or roll on the table below to define
your expertise as an entertainer.

dl0 Enterlainer Routine dl0 Enterlainer Routine
1 Actor 6 Instrumentalist
2 Dancer 7 Poet
3 Fire-eater 8 Singer
4 }ester 9 Storyteller
S Juggler 10 Tumbler

FEATURE: By POPULAR DEMAND
Vou can always find a place to perform, usually in an
inn or tavern but possibly with a circus, at a theater, or
even in a noble's court. At such a place, you receive free
lodging and food of a modest or comfortable standard
(depending on the quality of the establishment), as
long as you perform each night. In addition, your
performance makes you something of a local figure.
When strangers recognize you in a town where you have
performed, they typically take a liking to you.

SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Successful entertainers have to be able to capture
and hold an audience's attention, so they tend to
have flamboyant or forceful personalities. They're
inclined toward the romantic and often cling to
high-minded ideaIs about the practice of art and the
appreciation of beauty.

d8 Personality Trait
1 I know a story relevant to almost every situation.
2 Whenever I come to a new place, I collect local rumors

and spread gossip.
3 I'm a hopeless romantic, always searching for that

"special someone."
4 Nobody stays angry at me or around me for long, since

I can defuse any amount of tension.
S I love a good insult, even one directed at me.
6 I get bitter if I'm not the center of attention.
7 1'11settle for nothing less than perfection.
8 I change my mood or my mind as quickly as I change

key in a song.


d6 Ideal Ski1l Proficiencies: Animal Handling, Survival
1 Beauly. When I perform, I make lhe world belter lhan Tool Proficiencies: One type of artisan's tools,

il was. (Good) vehicles (land)
2 Tradilion. lhe slories, legends, and songs of the past Equipment: A set of artisan's tools (one of your choice),

must never be forgolten, for they teach us who we a shovel, an iran pot, a set of common clothes, and a
are. (Lawful) belt pouch containing 10 gp
3 Creativily. lhe world is in need of new ideas and bold
action. (Chaotic) DEFINING EVENT
4 Greed. I'm only in it for the money and fame. (Evil) Vou previously pursued a simple prafession among
5 People. I like seeing the smiles on people's faces when the peasantry, perhaps as a farmer, miner, servant,
I perform. lha!'s ali that matters. (Neutral) shepherd, woodcutter, ar gravedigger. But something
6 Honesly. Art should reflect the soul; it should come happened that set you on a different path and marked
from within and reveal who we really are. (Any) you for greater things. Choose or randomly determine a
defining event that marked you as a hera of the people.
d6 Bond
1 My instrument is my most treasured possession, and it dl0 Defining Evenl
1 I stood up to a tyrant's agents.
reminds me of someone I love. 2 I saved people during a natural disaster.
2 Someone slole my precious instrumenl, and someday 3 I stood alone against a terrible monster.
4 I stole from a corrupt merchant to help the poor.
1'11get il back. 5 I led a militia to fight off an invading army.
3 I wanl to be famous, whatever it takes. 6 I broke into a tyran!'s castle and stole weapons to arm
4 I idolize a hero of the old tales and measure my deeds the people.
7 I trained the peasantry to use farm implements as
against lhal person's. weapons against a tyrant's soldiers.
5 I will do anything to prove myself superior to my hated 8 A lord rescinded an unpopular decree after I led a
symbolic act of protect against il.
rival. 9 A celestial, fey, or similar creature gave me a blessing
6 I would do anything for the other members of my or revealed my secret origino
10 Recruited into a lord's army, I rose to leadership and
old troupe. was commended for my heroismo

d6 Flaw FEATURE: RUSTIC HOSPITALITY
1 1'11do anything lo win fame and renown. Since you come from the ranks of the common folk,
2 I'm a sucker for a pretty face. you fit in among them with ease. Vou can find a place
3 A scandal prevents me from ever going home again. to hide, rest, or recuperate among other commoners,
unless you have shown yourself to be a danger to
lhat kind of trouble seems to follow me around. them. They will shield you from the law or anyone
4 I once satirized a noble who still wants my head. It was else searching for you, though they will not risk
their lives for YOU.
a mistake lhat I willlikely repeal.
5 I have trouble keeping my true feelings hidden. My SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
A folk hero is one of the common people, for better
sharp tongue lands me in trouble. or for worse. Most folk heraes look on their humble
6 Despile my best efforts, I am unreliable to my friends. origins as a virtue, not a shortcoming, and their home
communities remain very important to them.
VARIANT ENTERTAINER: GLADIATOR
A gladiator is as much an entertainer as any minstrel d8 Personalily Trail
or circus performer, trained to make the arts of combat 1 I judge people by lheir aclions, nol lheir words.
into a spectacle the crawd can enjoy. This kind of 2 If someone is in trouble, I'm always ready to lend help.
flashy combat is your entertainer routine, though you 3 When I set my mind to something, I follow through no
might also have some skills as a tumbler or actor.
Using your By Popular Demand feature, you can find a malter what gets in my way.
place to perform in any place that features combat for 4 I have a strong sense of fair play and always try to find
entertainment-perhaps a gladiatorial arena or secret
pit fighting club. Vou can replace the musical instrument the most equilable solution to arguments.
in your equipment package with an inexpensive but 5 I'm confidenl in my own abilities and do what I can to
unusual weapon, such as a trident or neto
instill confidence in others.
FOLK HERO 6 lhinking is for other people. I prefer action.
7 I misuse long words in an attempt to sound smarter.
Vou come from a humble social rank, but you are 8 I get bored easily. When am I going to get on wilh my
destined for so much more. Already the people of
your home village regard you as their champion, and desliny?
your destiny calls you to stand against the tyrants and
monsters that threaten the common folk everywhere. PART I I PERSONALlTY AND BACKGROUND


d6 Ideal d6 Flaw
1 Respect. People deserve to be treated with dignity and 1 lhe tyrant who rules my land will stop at nothing to

respect. (Good) see me killed.
2 Faimess. No one should get preferentialtreatment 2 I'm convinced ofthe significance ofmy destiny, and

before the law, and no one is above the law. (Lawful) blind to my shortcomings and the risk oHailure.
3 Freedom. lyrants must not be allowed to oppress the 3 lhe people who knew me when I was young know my

people. (Chaotic) shameful secret, 50 I can never go home again.
4 Might. If I beco me strong, I can take what I want- 4 I have a weakness for the vices of the city, especially

whatl deserve. (Evil) hard drink.
5 Sincerity. lhere's no good in pretending to be 5 Secretly, I believe thatthings would be beller if I were a

something I'm not. (Neutral) tyrantlording over the land.
6 Destiny. Nothing and no one can steer me away from 6 I have trouble trusting in my allies.

my higher calling. (Any) GUILD ARTISAN

d6 Bond Vou are a member of an artisan's guild, skilled in
1 I have a family, butl have no idea where they are. One a particular field and c10sely associated with other
artisans. Vou are a well-established part of the
day, I hope to see them again. mercantile world, freed by talent and wealth from the
2 I worked the land, I love the land, and I will protect the constraints of a feudal social order. Vou learned your
skills as an apprentice to a master artisan, under the
land. sponsorship of your guild, until you became a master in
3 A proud noble once gave me a horrible beating, and I your own right.

will take my revenge on any bully I encounter. Skill Proficiencies: lnsight, Persuasion
4 My tools are symbols of my pastlife, and I carry them Tool Proficiencies: One type of artisan's tools
Languages: One of your choice
50 that I will never forget my roots. Equiprnent: A set of artisan's tools (one of your choice),
5 I protectthose who cannot protectthemselves.
6 I wish my childhood sweetheart had come with me to a letter of introduction from your guild, a set of
traveler's c1othes, and a belt pouch containing 15 gp
pursue my destiny.
GUILD BUSINESS
Guilds are generally found in cities large enough to
support several artisans practicing the same trade.
However, your guild might instead be a loose network
of artisans who each work in a different village within
a larger realm. Work with your DM to determine the
nature of your guild. Vou can select your guild business
from the Guild Business table or roll randomly.

d20 Guild Business
1 Alchemists and apothecaries
2 Armorers, locksmiths, and finesmiths
3 Brewers, distillers, and vintners
4 Calligraphers, scribes, and scriveners
5 Carpenters, roofers, and plasterers
6 Cartographers, surveyors, and chart-makers
7 Cobblers and shoemakers
8 Cooks and bakers
9 Glassblowers and glaziers
10 Jewelers and gemcutters
11 Leatherworkers, skinners, and tanners
12 Masons and stonecullers
13 Painters, Iimners, and sign.makers
14 Potters and tile-makers
15 Shipwrights and sailmakers
16 Smiths and metal-forgers
17 Tinkers, pewterers, and casters
18 Wagon-makers and wheelwrights
19 Weavers and dyers
20 Woodcarvers, coopers, and bowyers

'32


As a member of your guild, you know the skills needed d6 Ideal
to creale finished items from raw materiaIs (reflected in 1 Community. It is the duty of ali civilized people to
your proficiency with a certain kind of artisan's tools),
as well as the principies of trade and good business strengthen the bonds of community and the security
practices. The question now is whether you abandon of civillzation. (Lawful)
your trade for adventure, or take on the extra effort to 2 Generosity. My talents were given to me so that I could
weave adventuring and trade together. use them to beneht the world. (Good)
3 Freedom. Everyone should be free to pursue his or her
FEATURE: GUILD MEMBERSHIP own livelihood. (Chaotic)
As an established and respected member of a guild, you 4 Greed. I'm only in it for the money. (Evil)
can rely on certain benefits that membership provides. S People. I'm committed to the people I care about, not
Your fellow guild members will provide you with to ideais. (Neutral)
lodging and food if necessary, and pay for your funeral 6 Aspiration. I work hard to be the best there is at
if needed. In some cities and towns, a guildhall offers a my craft.
central place to meet other members of your profession,
which can be a good place to meet potential patrons, d6 Bond
allies, or hirelings. 1 The workshop where I learned my trade is the most

Guilds often wield tremendous political power. If important place in the world to me.
you are accused of a crime, your guild will support you 2 I created a great work for someone, and then found
if a good case can be made for your innocence or the
crime isjustifiable. Vou can also gain access to powerful them unworthy to receive it. I'm stilllooking for
political figures through the guild, if you are a member someone worthy.
in good standing. Such connections might require the 3 I owe my guild a great debt for forging me into the
donation of money or magic items to the guild's coffers. person I am today.
4 I pursue wealth to secure someone's love.
Vou must pay dues of 5 gp per month to the guild. If S One day I will return to my guild and prove that I am
you miss payments, you must make up back dues to the greatest artisan of them alI.
remain in the guild's good graces. 6 I will get revenge on the evil forces that destroyed my
place ofbusiness and ruined my Iivelihood.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Guild artisans are among the most ordinary people in d6 Flaw
the world-until they set down their tools and take up 1 1'11do anything to get my hands on something rare or
an adventuring career. They understand the value of
hard work and the importance of community, but they're priceless.
vulnerable to sins of greed and covetousness. 2 I'm quick to assume that someone Is trying to cheat

d8 Personality Trait me.
3 No one must ever learn that I once stole money from
1 I believe that anything worth doing is worth doing
righl. I can't help it-I'm a perfectionisl. guild coffers.
4 I'm never satished wlth what I have-I always want
2 I'm a snob who looks down on those who can't
appreciate hne art. more.
S I would kill to acquire a noble title.
3 I always want to know how things work and what 6 I'm horribly jealous of anyone who can outshine my
makes people tick.
handiwork. Everywhere I go, I'm surrounded by rivais.
4 I'm full ofwitty aphorisms and have a proverb for
every occasion. VARIANT GUILD ARTISAN: GUlLD MERCHANT
Instead of an artisans' guild, you might belong to a
S I'm rude to people who lack my commitment to hard guild of traders, caravan masters, or shopkeepers. Vou
work and fair play. don't craft items yourself but earn a living by buying
and selling lhe works of others (or the raw materiaIs
6 I like to talk at length about my profession. artisans need to practice lheir craft). Your guild might
7 I don't part with my money easily and will haggle be a large merchant consortium (or family) with
interests across the region. Perhaps you transported
tirelessly to get the best deal possible. goods from one place to another, by ship, wagon, or
8 I'm well known for my work, and I want to make sure caravan, or bought them from traveling traders and sold
them in your own little shop. In some ways, the traveling
everyone appreclates lI. I'm always taken aback when merchant's life lends itself to adventure far more than
people haven't heard of me. the life of an artisan.

Rather lhan proficiency with artisan's tools, you might 133
be proficient with navigator's tools or an additional
language. And instead of artisan's tools, you can start
with a mule and a carl.

PART I I PERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROUND


HERMIT d8 Life ofSeclusion
5 I needed a quiet plaee to work on my art, literature,
Vou lived in seclusion-either in a sheltered community
such as a monastery, or entirely aJone-for a formative music, ar manifesto.
part of your life. In your time apart from the clamor of 6 I needed to eommune with nature, far from civilization.
society, you found quiet, solitude, and perhaps some of 7 I was the earetaker of an aneient ruin or relie.
the answers you were looking for. 8 I was a pilgrim in seareh of a person, plaee, or relie of

Skill Proficiencies: Medicine, Religion spiritual signifieanee.
Tool Proficiencies: Herbalism kit
Languages: One of your choice FEATURE: DISCOVERY
Equiprnent: A scroll case stuffed full of notes fram your The quiet seclusion of your extended hermitage gave you
access to a unique and powerful discovery. The exact
studies or prayers, a winter blanket, a set of common nature of this revelation depends on the nature of your
clothes, an herbalism kit, and 5 gp seclusion. It might be a great truth about the cosmos,
the deities, the powerful beings of the outer planes, or
LIFE OF SECLUSION the forces of nature. It could be a site that no one else
What was the reason for your isolation, and what has ever seen. Vou might have uncovered a fact that has
changed to allow you to end your solitude? Vou can work long been forgotten, or unearthed some reli c of the past
with your DM to determine the exact nature of your that could rewrite history. It might be information that
seclusion, or you can choose or roll on the table below to would be damaging to the peopJe who or consigned you
determine the reason behind your seclusion. to exile, and hence the reason for your return to society.

d8 Life ofSeclusion Work with your DM to determine the details of your
1 I was searehing for spiritual enlightenment. discovery and its impact on the campaign.
2 I was partaking of eommunalliving in aeeordanee with
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
the dietates of a religious order. Some hermits are well suited to a life of seclusion,
3 I was exiled for a erime I didn't eommit. whereas others chafe against it and long for company.
4 I retreated from soeiety after a life-altering evento Whether they embrace solitude or long to escape it, the
solitary life shapes their attitudes and ideais. A few are
driven slightly mad by their years apart from society.

d8 Personality Trait
1 I've been isolated for so long that I rarely speak,

preferring gestures and the oeeasional grunt.
2 I am utterly serene, even in the faee of disaster.
3 The leader of my eommunity had something wise

to say on every topie, and I am eager to share
that wisdom.
4 I feel tremendous empathy for ali who sulfer.
5 I'm oblivious to etiquette and soeial expeetations.
6 I eonneet everything that happens to me to a grand,
eosmie plan.
7 I often get lost in my own thoughts and eontemplation,
beeoming oblivious to my surroundings.
8 I am working on a grand philosophieal theory and love
sharing my ideas.

d6 Ideal
1 Greater Good. My gifts are meant to be shared with ali,

not used for my own benefit. (Good)
2 Logic. Emotions must not c10ud our sense of what is

right and true, or our logieal thinking. (Lawful)
3 Free Thinking. Inquiry and euriosity are the pillars of

progresso ((haotie)
4 Power. Solitude and eontemplation are paths toward

mystieal or magieal power. (Evil)
5 Live and Let Live. Meddling in the alfairs of others only

eauses trouble. (Neutral)
6 Self.Knowledge. If you know yourself, there's nothing

left to know. (Any)

134


d6 Bond does your family have among the other aristocrats of the
1 Nothing is more important than the other members of region? How do the common people regard them?

my hermitage, order, or association. What's your position in the family? Are you the hei r
2 I entered sedusion to hide from the ones who might to the head of the family? Have you already inherited
the title? How do you feel about that responsibility? Or
still be hunting me. I must someday confront them. are you so far down the line of inheritance that no one
3 I'm still seeking the enlightenment I pursued in my cares what you do, as long as you don't embarrass the
family? How does the head of your family feel about
sedusion, and it still eludes me. your adventuring career? Are you in your family's good
4 I entered sedusion because I lovedsomeone I could graces, or shunned by the rest of your family?

not have. Does your family have a coat of arms? An insignia you
5 Should mydiscoverycome to Iight,it could bring ruin to might wear on a signet ring? Particular colors you wear
all the time? An animal you regard as a symbol of your
the world. line or even a spiritual member of the family?
6 Myisolationgave me great insight into a great evilthat
These details help establish your family and your title
only I can destroy. as features of the world of the campaign.

d6 Flaw Skill Proficiencies: History, Persuasion
1 Nowthat I've returned to the world, I enjoy its delights Toal Proficiencies: One type af gaming set
Languages: One of your choice
a little too much. Equiprnent: A set of fine clothes, a signet ring, a scroll
2 I harbor dark, bloodthirsty thoughts that my isolation
of pedigree, and a purse containing 25 gp
and meditation failed to quell.
3 I am dogmatic in mythoughts and philosophy. FEATURE: POSITION OF PRIVILEGE
4 I let my need to win arguments overshadow
Thanks to your noble birth, people are inclined to
friendships and harmony. think the best of you. Vou are welcome in high society,
5 I'd risk too much to uncover a lost bit ofknowledge. and people assume you have the right to be wherever
6 I likekeeping secrets and won't share them with you are. The common folk make every effort to
accommodate you and avoid your displeasurc, and other
anyone. people of high birth treal you as a member of the same
social sphere. Vou can secure an audience with a local
OTHER HERMITS noble if you need to.

This hermit background assumes a contempla tive sort SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
of seclusion that allows room for study and prayer. If you
want to play a rugged wilderness recluse who lives off Nobles are born and raised to a very different lifestyle
the land while shunning the company of other people, than most people ever experience, and their personalities
look at the outlander background. On the other hand, if reflect that upbringing. A noble title comes with a
you want to go in a more religious direction, the acolyte plethora of bonds-responsibilities to family, to other
might be what you're looking for. Or you could even be a nobles (including the sovereign), to the people entrusted
charlatan, posing as a wise and holy person and letting to the family's care, or even to the title itself. But this
pious fools support you. responsibility is often a good way to undermine a noble.

NOBLE dS PersonalityTrait
1 Myeloquent ftattery makes everyone I talk to feel
Vou understand wealth, power, and privilege. Vou
carrya noble title, and your family owns land, collects Iikethe most wonderful and important person in the
taxes, and wields significant political influence. Vou world.
might be a pampered aristocrat unfamiliar with 2 The common folk love me for my kindness and
work or discomfort, a former merchant just elevated generosity.
to the nobility, or a disinherited scoundrel with a 3 No one could doubt by lookingat my regai bearing tha!
disproportionate sense of entitlement. Or you could be I am a cut above the unwashed masses.
an honest, hard-working landowner who cares deeply 4 I take great pains to alwayslook my best and followthe
about the people who live and work on your land, keenly latest fashions.
aware of your responsibility to them. 5 I don't liketo ge! my hands dirty, and I won't be caught
dead in unsuitable accommodations.
Work with your DM to come up with an appropriate 6 Despite my noble birth, I do not place myselfabove
title and determine how much authority that title other folk.We ali have the same blood.
carries. A noble title doesn't stand on its own-it's 7 Myfavor,once lost, is lost forever.
connected to an entire family, and whatever title you S Ifyou do me an injury,I willcrush you, ruin your name,
hold, you will pass it down to your own children. Not and salt your fields.
only do you need to determine your noble title, but you
should also work with the DM to describe your family
and their influence on you.

Is your family old and established, or was your title
only recently bestowed? How much influence do they
wield, and over what area? What kind of reputation

PART 1 I PERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROU"O 135


d6 Ideal training on his or her own path to knighthood. Your two
1 Respeet. Respeet is due to me beeause of my position, remaining retainers might inelude a groom to care for
your horse and a servant who polishes your armor (and
but ali people regardless of station deserve to be even helps you put it on).
treated with dignity. (Good)
2 Responsibility. It is my duty to respeet the authority of As an emblem of chivalry and the ideais of courtly
those above me, just as those below me must respeet love, you might inelude among your equipment a banner
mine. (Lawful) or other token from a noble lord or lady to whom you
3 Independenee. I must prove that I ean handle myself have given your heart-in a chasle sort of devotion.
without the eoddling of my family. (Chaotie) (This person could be your bond.)
4 Power. If I ean altain more power, no one will tell me
what to do. (Evil) OUTLANDER
5 Family. Blood runs thieker than water. (Any)
6 Noble Obligation. It is my duty to proteet and eare for Vou grew up in lhe wilds, far from civilization and the
the people beneath me. (Good) comforts of town and technology. You've witnessed the
migration of herds larger than forests, survived weather
d6 Bond more extreme than any city-dweller could comprehend,
1 I will face any ehallenge to win the approval of my and enjoyed the solitude of being the only thinking
creature for miles in any direction. The wilds are in
family. your blood, whether you were a nomad, an explorer, a
2 My house's allianee with another noble family reei use, a hunter-gatherer, or even a marauder. Even in
places where you don'l know the specific features of the
must be sustained at ali costs. terrain, you know the ways of the wild.
3 Nothing is more important than the other members
Skill Proficiencies: Athletics, Survival
of my family. Tool Proficiencies: One type of musical instrumenl
4 I am in love with the hei r of a family that my family Languages: One of your choice
Equiprnent: A staff, a hunting trap, a trophy from an
despises.
5 My loyalty to my sovereign is unwavering. animal you killed, a set of traveler's e1othes, and a belt
6 The eommon folk must see me as a hero of the people. pouch containing 10 gp

d6 Flaw ORIGIN
1 I secretly believe that everyone is beneath me. You've been to strange places and seen things that
2 I hide a truly seandalous secret that eould ruin my others cannot begin to fathom. Consider some of the
distant lands you have visited, and how they impacted
family forever. you. Vou can roll on the following table lo delermine
3 I toe often hear veiled insults and threats in every word your occupation during your time in the wild, or choose
one that best fits your character.
addressed to me, and I'm quiek to anger.
4 I have an insatiable desire for carnal pleasures. d10 Origin d10 Origin
5 In faet, the world does revolve around me. 1 Forester 6 Bounty hunter
6 By my words and actions, I often bring shame to 2 Trapper 7 Pilgrim
3 Homesteader 8 Tribal nomad
my family. 4 Guide 9 Hunter-gatherer
5 Exile or outcast 10 Tribal marauder
VARIANT NOBLE: KNIGHT

A knighthood is among the lowest noble titles in most FEATURE:\¥ANDERER
societies, but it can be a path to higher status. ]f you Vou have an excellent memory for maps and geography,
wish to be a knight, choose the Retainers feature (see and you can always recall the generallayout of terrain,
the sidebar) instead of the Position of Privilege feature. settlements, and other features around you. In addition,
you can find food and fresh water for yourse]f and up to
One of your commoner retainers is replaced by a noble five other people each day, provided that the land offers
berries, small game, water, and so forth.
who serves as your squire, aiding you in exchange for
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
•• •.. Often considered rude and uncouth among civilized
VARIANT FEATURE: RETAINERS folk, outlanders have little respect for the niceties of
life in the cHies. The ties of tribe, e1an, family, and the
If your character has a noble background, you may select this natural world of which they are a part are the mosl
important bonds lo most outlanders.
background feature instead of Position of Privilege.

You have the service ofthree retainers loyal to your family.

These retainers can be attendants or messengers, and one

might be a majordomo. Your retainers are commoners who

can perform mundane tasks for you, but they do not fight

for you, will not follow you into obviously dangerous areas

(such as dungeons). and willleave ifthey are frequently

endangered or abused. ,.

••

PART I I PERSONALITY AND BACKGROUND


d8 Personality Trait SAGE
1 I'm driven by a wanderlust that led me away
Vou spent years learning the lore of the multiverse. Vou
from home. scoured manuscripts, studied scrolls, and listened to the
2 I wateh over my friends as if they were a litter of greatest experts on the subjects that interest you. Your
efforts have made you a master in your fields of study.
newborn pups.
3 I onee ran twenty-five miles without stopping to warn Skill Proficiencies: Arcana, History
Languages: Two ofyour choice
to my e1an of an approaehing ore horde. I'd do it again Equiprnent: A bottle of black ink, a quil!, a small knife,
if I had to.
4 I have a lesson for every situation, drawn from a letter from a dead colleague posing a question you
observing nature. have not yet been able to answer, a set of common
S I plaee no stoek in wealthy or well-mannered folk. clothes, and a belt pouch containing 10 gp
Money and manners won't save you from a hungry
owlbear. SPECIALTY
6 I'm always pieking things up, absently fiddling with
them, and sometimes aeeidentally breaking them. To determine the nature of your scholarly training, roll a
7 I feel far more eomfortable around animais than d8 or choose from the options in the table below.
people.
8 I was, in faet, raised by wolves. d8 Specialty d8 Specialty
1 Alchemist S Professor
d6 Ideal 2 Astronomer 6 Researeher
1 Change. Life is like the seasons, in constant ehange, 3 Discredited 7 Wizard's apprentiee
8 Seribe
and we must ehange with il. (Chaotie) aeademie
2 Greater Good. It is eaeh person's responsibility to 4 Librarian

make the most happiness for the whole tribe. (Good)
3 Honor. If I dishonor myself, I dishonor my whole

e1an. (Lawful)
4 Might. The strongest are meant to rule. (Evil)
S Nature. The natural world is more important than ali

the eonstruets of eivilization. (Neutral)
6 Glory. I must earn glory in battle, for myself and

myelan. (Any)

d6 Bond
1 My family, e1an, or tribe is the most important thing in

my life, even when they are far from me.
2 An injury to the unspoiled wilderness of my home is an

injury to me.
3 I will bring terrible wrath down on the evildoers who

destroyed my homeland.
4 Iam the last of my tribe, and it is up to me to ensure

their names enter legend.
S I suffer awful visions of a eoming disaster and will do

anything to prevent il.
6 It is my duty to provide ehildren to sustain my tribe.

d6 Flaw
1 I am too enamored of ale, wine, and other intoxieants.
2 There's no room for eaution in a life lived to the fullest.
3 I remember every insult I've reeeived and nurse a silent

resentment toward anyone who's ever wronged me.
4 Iam slow to trust members of other raees, tribes, and

societies.

S Violenee is my answer to almost any ehallenge.
6 Don't expeet me to save those who ean't save

themselves. It is nature's way that the strong thrive
and the weak perish.


FEATURE: RESEARCHER d8 Personality Trait
When you atlempt to learn or recall a piece of lore, if you 1 I use polysyllabie words that eonvey lhe impression of
do not know that information, you often know where and
fram whom you can obtain it. Usually, this information greal erudilion.
comes from a !ibrary, scriptorium, university, or a sage 2 I've read every book in the world's greatest libraries-
or other learned person or creature, Your DM might
rule that the knowledge you seek is secreted away in an or I like to boast that I have.
almost inaccessible place, or that it simply cannot be 3 I'm used lo helping oul lhose who aren't as smarl as I
found. Unearthing the deepest secrets of the multiverse
can require an adventure or even a whole campaign. am, and I patiently explain anything and everylhing to
others.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 4 There's nothing I like more lhan a good mystery.
Sages are defined by their extensive studies, and their S I'm willing to listen to every side of an argumenl before
characteristics reflect this !ife of study. Devoted to I make my own judgment.
scholarly pursuits, a sage values knowledge highly- 6 I ... speak ... slowly ... when talking to idiolS, .
sometimes in its own right, sometimes as a means whieh ... almosl ... everyone ... is eompared .
toward other ideaIs. to me.
7 I am horribly, horribly awkward in social situalions.
8 I'm eonvineed thal people are always trying to steal my
secrets.

d6 Ideal
1 Knowledge. The path to power and self-improvement

is through knowledge. (Neutral)
2 Beauty. What is beautiful points us beyond itself

toward what is true. (Good)
3 logie. Emotions must not c10ud our logieal lhinking.

(lawful)
4 No Limits. Nothing should fetter the infinite possibility

inherent in ali existenee. ((haotie)
S Power. Knowledge is the path to power and

domination. (Evil)
6 Self.lmprovement. The goal of a life of study is the

betterment of oneself. (Any)

d6 Bond
1 It is my duty to proteet my students.
2 I have an aneient text that holds terrible secrets that

must not fali into the wrong hands.
3 I work to preserve a library, university, scriptorium,

ar monastery.
4 My life's work is a series of tomes related to a speeifie

field of lore.
S I've been searehing my whole life for the answer to a

certa in questiono
6 I sold my sou I for knowledge. I hope to do great deeds

and win it baek.

d6 Flaw
1 I am easily distraeted by the promise of information.
2 Most people scream and run when they see a demon. I

stop and take notes on its anatomy.
3 Unloeking an aneient mystery is worth the priee of a

civilization.
4 I overlook obvious solutions in favor of eomplieated

ones.
S I speak without really thinking through my words,

invariably insulting others.
6 I ean't keep a seeret to save my life, or anyone else's.


SAILOR d6 Ideal
1 Respecl. The Ihing Ihal keeps a ship logelher is mulual
Vou sailed on a seagoing vessel for years. In that
respecl belween caplain and crew. (Good)
time, you faced down mighty storms, monsters of the 2 Fairness. We ali do lhe work, so we ali share in lhe

deep, and those who wanted to sink your craft to the rewards. (Lawful)
3 Freedom. The sea is freedom-Ihe freedom lo go
bottomless depths. Your first love is the distant line of
anywhere and do anything. (Chaolic)
the horizan, but the time has come to try your hand 4 Maslery. I'm a predalor, and lhe olher ships on lhe sea

at something new. are my prey. (Evil)
5 People. I'm committed lo my crewmales, not lo ideais.
Discuss the nature of the ship you previously sailed
(Neulral)
with your Dungeon Master. Was it a merchant ship, 6 Aspiralion. Someday 1'11 own my own ship and charl

a naval vessel, a ship of discovery, or a pirate ship? my own desliny. (Any)

How famous (or infamous) is it? Is it widely traveled?

Is it stiII sailing, or is it missing and presumed lost

with ali hands?

What were your duties on board-boatswain, capta in,

navigator, cook, or some other position? Who were the

captain and first mate? Did you leave your ship on good d6 Bond
1 I'm loyal lo my captain first, everything else second.
terms with your fellows, or on the run? 2 The ship is mosl important-crewmates and caplains

Skill Proficiencies: Athletics, Perception come and go.
Tool Proficiencies: Navigator's tools, vehides (water) 3 1'11always remember my firsl ship.
Equipment: A belaying pin (dub), 50 feet of silk rope, 4 In a harbor lown, I have a paramour whose eyes nearly

a lucky charm such as a rabbit foot or a small stone slole me from lhe sea.
with a hole in the center (or you may roll for a random 5 I was chealed oul of my fair share of lhe profils, and I
trinket on the Trinkets table in chapter 5), a set of
common dothes, and a belt pouch containing 10 gp wanl lo gel my due.
6 Rulhless pirales murdered my caplain and crewmales,
FEATURE: SHIP'S PASSAGE
When you need to, you can secure free passage on plundered our ship, and lefl me lo die. Vengeance will
a sailing ship for yourself and your adventuring be mine.
companions. Vou might sail on the ship you served on,
or another ship you have good relations with (perhaps d6 Flaw
one captained bya former crewmate). Because you're 1 I follow orders, even if I Ihink Ihey're wrong.
calling in a favor, you can't be certain of a schedule or 2 1'11say anylhing lo avoid having lo do exlra work.
route that wiII meet your every need. Your Dungeon 3 Once someone queslions my courage, I never back
Master wiII determine how long it takes to get where
you need to go. In return for your free passage, you down no maller how dangerous lhe silualion.
and your companions are expected to assist the crew 4 Once I slarl drinking, il's hard for me lo slop.
during the voyage. 5 I can'l help but pockel loose coins and olher Irinkels I

SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS come across.
Sailors can be a rough lot, but the responsibilities of 6 My pride will probably lead lo my deslruclion.
life on a ship make them generally reliable as welI. Life
aboard a ship shapes their outlook and forms their most VARIANT SAILOR: PIRATE
important attachments.
Vou spent your youlh under the sway of a dread pirate,

a ruthless cutthroat who taught you how to survive in a

worId of sharks and savages. You've indulged in larceny

d8 Personalily Trail on the high seas and sent more than one deserving soul
1 My friends know they can rely on me, no matter what.
2 I work hard so that I can play hard when lhe work to a briny grave. Fear and bloodshed are no strangers

is done. to you, and you've garnered a somewhal unsavory
I enjoy sailing inlo new porls and making new friends
over a flagon of ale. reputation in many a port town.
4 I slrelch lhe Irulh for lhe sake of a good slory.
5 To me, a lavem brawl is a nice way lo gel lo know a If you decide thal your sailing career involved piracy,
new cily.
6 I never pass up a friendly wager. you can choose the Bad Reputalion feature (see sidebar)
7 My language is as foul as an olyugh nesl.
8 Ilike a job well done, especially if I can convince instead of the Ship's Passage feature.
someone else lo do il.
••• ••

VARIANT FEATURE: BAD REPUTATION

If your characler has a sai lor background, you may selecl Ihis

background fealure inslead ofShip's Passage.

No malter where you go, people are afraid of you due lo

your repulalion. When you are in a civilized seltlement, you

can gel away wilh minor criminal offenses, such as refusing

to pay for food at a tavern ar breaking down doors at a local

shop, since mosl people will nol reporl your aclivily lo lhe

aulhorilies. ••

••

PART 1 PERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROUNO [39


SOLDIER SPECIALTY
During your time as a soldier, you had a specific role to
War has been your !ife for as long as you care to pIay in your unit or army. Roll a d8 or choose from the
remember. Vou trained as a youth, studied the use of options in the table below to determine your role:
weapons and armor, learned basic survival techniques,
including how to stay a!ive on the battlefield. Vou d8 Specially d8 Specially
might have been part of a standing national army or a 1 Officer 6 Quartermasler
mercenary company, or perhaps a member of a local 2 Scoul 7 Standard bearer
militia who rose to prominence during a recent war. 3 Infanlry 8 Supporl slaff (cook,
4 Cavalry
When you choose this background, work with your 5 Healer blacksmilh, or lhe
DM to determine which military organization you were like)
a part of, how far through its ranks you progressed, and
what kind of experiences you had during your mi!itary FEATURE: MILITARY RANK
career. Was it a standing army, a town guard, or a village Vou have a military rank from your career as a soldier.
militia? Or it might have been a noble's or merchant's SoIdiers loyal to your former military organization
private army, or a mercenary company. still recognize your authority and inftuence, and they
defer to you if they are of a Iower rank. Vou can invoke
Skill Proficiencies: Athletics, Intimidation your rank to exert inftuence over other soldiers and
TooI Proficiencies: One type of gaming set, requisition simple equipment or horses for temporary
use. Vou can aIso usually gain access to friendly
vehicles (Iand) military encampments and fortresses where your
Equiprnent: An insignia of rank, a trophy taken from rank is recognized.

a fallen enemy (a dagger, broken blade, or piece of a SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
banner), a set of bone dice or deck of cards, a set of The horrors of war combined with the rigid discipline of
common clothes, and a beIt pouch containing 10 gp military service leave their mark on ali soldiers, shaping
their ideais, creating strong bonds, and often leaving
them scarred and vuInerable to fear, shame, and hatred.

d8 Personalily Trail
1 I'm always polite and respectfu!'
2 I'm haunled by memories of war. I can't gel lhe images

of violence oul of my mind.
I've lost too many friends, and I'm slow lo make new
one$.
4 I'm full ofinspiring and caulionary lales from my
mililary experience relevant to almosl every combat
situation.
5 I can stare down a hell hound without flinching.
6 I enjoy being slrong and like breaking lhings.
7 I have a crude sense of humor.
8 I face problems head.on. A simple, direcl solulion is
lhe besl path to success.

d6 Ideal
1 Grealer Good. Our 101 is lo lay down our lives in

defense of others. (Good)
2 Responsibilily. I do what I must and obey just

authorily. (Lawful)
3 Independence. When people follow orders blindly, they

embrace a kind of tyranny. (Chaolic)
4 Might. In life as in war, the slronger force wins. (Evil)
5 Live and Let Live. Ideais aren't worth killing over or

going to war for. (Neutral)
6 Nalion. My city, nalion, or people are allthal malter.

(Any)


d6 Bond d8 Personalily Trail
1 I would stilllay down my life for the people I 1 I hide scraps offood and lrinkels away in my pockets.
2 I ask a lot of queslions.
served with. 3 I like lo squeeze inlo small places where no one else
2 Someone saved my life on the battlefield. To this day, I
can gello me.
will never leave a friend behind. 4 I sleep wilh my back to a wall or tree, with everylhing I
3 My honor is my life.
4 1'11 never forget the crushing defeat my company own wrapped in a bundle in my arms.
S I eat like a pig and have bad manners.
suffered or the enemies who dealt il. 6 I think anyone who's nice to me is hiding evil intento
S Those who fight beside me are those worth dying for. 7 I don't like to bathe.
6 I fight for those who cannot fight for themselves. 8 I blunlly say what olher people are hinling aI ar hiding.

d6 Flaw d6 Ideal
1 The monstrous enemy we faced in battle stillleaves 1 Respecl. Ali people, rich ar poor, deserve respect.

me quivering with fear. (Good)
2 I have little respect for anyone who is not a 2 Communily. We have to take care of each other,

proven warrior. because no one else is going to do il. (Lawful)
3 I made a terrible mistake in battle cost many lives- 3 Change. The low are lifted up, and the high and mighty

and I would do anything to keep that mistake secrel. are brought down. Change is the nature oflhings. .
4 My hatred of my enemies is blind and unreasoning. (Chaolic)
S I obey the law, even if the law causes misery. 4 Relribulion. The rich need to be shown what life and
6 I'd rather eat my armor than admit when I'm wrong. death are like in the gutters. (Evil)
S People. I help the people who help me-that's what
URCHIN keeps us alive. (Neutral)
6 Aspiration. I'm going to prove that I'm worthy of a
Vou grew up on the streets alone, orphaned, and poor. better life.
Vou had no one to watch over you or to provide for
you, so you learned to provide for yourself. Vou fought d6 Bond
fiercely over food and kept a constant watch out for other 1 My town ar city is my home, and 1'11fight to defend il.
desperate souls who might steal from you. Vou slept on 2 I sponsor an orphanage to keep others from enduring
rooftops and in alleyways, exposed to the elements, and
endured sickness without the advantage of medicine or what I was forced to endure.
a place to recuperate. You've survived despi te ali odds, 3 I owe my survival to another urchln who taught me to
and did so through cunning, strength, speed, or some
combination of each. live on the streets.
4 I owe a debt I can never repay to the person who took
Vou begin your adventuring career with enough
money to live modestly but securely for at least ten days. pity on me.
How did you come by that money? What allowed you to S I escaped my life of poverty by robbing an important
break free of your desperate circumstances and embark
on a better life? person, and I'm wanted for il.
6 No one else should have to endure the hardships I've
Skill Proficiencies: Sleight of Hand, Stealth
Tool Proficiencies: Disguise kit, thieves' tools been through.
Equiprnent: A small knife, a map of the city you
d6 Flaw
grew up in, a pet mouse, a token to remember your 1 If I'm outnumbered, I will run away from a fighl.
parents by, a set of common clothes, and a belt pouch 2 Gold seems like a lot of money to me, and 1'11 do just
containing 10 gp
about anything for more of il.
FEATURE: CITY SECRETS 3 I will never fully trust anyone other than myself.
Vou know the secret patterns and flow to cities and can 4 I'd rather kill someone in their sleep then fight fair.
find passages through the urban sprawl that others would S It's not stealing if I need It more than someone else.
miss. When you are not in combat, you (and companions 6 People who can't take care of themselves get what they
you lead) can travei between any two locations in the city
twice as fast as your speed would normally allow. deserve.

SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS PART 1 I PERSONALlTY A. o BACKGROU '0
Urchins are shaped by lives of desperate poverty, for
good and for ill. They tend to be driven either by a
commitment to the people with whom they shared life
00 the street or by a burning desire to find a better life-
and maybe get some payback on ali the rich people who
treated them badly.


CHAPTER 5: EQUIPMENT Members of lhe nobilily lrade eilher in legal righls, such
as lhe righls lo a mine, a porl, or farmland, or in gold
~ bars, measuring gold by lhe pound ralher than by lhe
HE MARKETPLACE OF A LARCE CITY TEEMS coin. Only merchanls, advenlurers, and lhose offering
with buyers and sellers of many sorts: prafessional services for hire commonly deal in coins.
dwarf smiths and elf woodcarvers, halfling
farmers and gnome jewelers, not to mention COINAGE
humans of every shape, size, and color
drawn fram a spectrum of nations and Common coins come in several differenl denominalions
cultures. In the largest cities, almost based on lhe relalive worlh of the melai fram which lhey
are made. The lhree mosl common coins are lhe gold
anything imaginable is offered for sale, fram exotic piece (gp), lhe silver piece (sp), and lhe copper piece (cp).
spices and luxurious clothing to wicker baskets and
practical swords. Wilh one gold piece, a character can buy a belt
pouch, 50 feel of good rape, or a goat. A skilled (bUl
For an adventurer, the availability of armor, weapons, nol exceplional) arlisan can earn one gold piece a day.
backpacks, rape, and similar goods is of paramount The gold piece is lhe slandard unil of measure for
importance, since praper equipmenl can mean lhe weallh, even if lhe coin ilself is nol commonly used.
difference belween life and dealh in a dungeon or the When merchanls discuss deals lhal involve goods or
unlamed wilds. This chapter delails the mundane and services worlh hundreds or thousands of gold pieces,
exolic merchandise lhal adventurers commonly find useful lhe lransaclions don'l usually involve lhe exchange of
in lhe face of lhe lhreats lhal the worlds of 0&0 present. individual coins. Ralher, lhe gold piece is a standard
measure of value, and lhe aclual exchange is in gold
STARTING EQUIPMENT bars, letters of credil, or valuable goods.

When you creale your characler, you receive equipment One gold piece is worlh len silver pieces, the mosl
based on a combinalion of your class and background. prevalenl coin among commoners. A silver piece buys a
Alternatively, you can starl with a number of gold pieces laborer's work for a day, a flask of lamp oil, or a night's
based on your class and spend them on items fram lhe rest in a poor inn.
lisls in this chapter. See the Slarling Weallh by Class
table lo determine how much gold you have lo spend. One silver piece is worlh len copper pieces, which are
common among laborers and beggars. A single copper
Vou decide how your characler carne by lhis starting piece buys a candle, a lorch, or a piece of chalk.
equipment. II mighl have been an inherilance, or goods
lhat the characler purchased during his or her upbringing. In addition, unusual coins made of other precious
Vou might have been equipped with a weapon, armor, and metais somelimes appear in lreasure hoards. The
a backpack as part of military service. Vou mighl even have eleclrum piece (ep) and lhe plalinum piece (pp) originale
stolen your gear. A weapon could be a family heirloom, from fallen empires and losl kingdoms, and lhey
passed down fram generalion lOgeneralion unlil your sometimes arause suspicion and skepticism when used
characler finally look up lhe mantle and followed in an in lransactions. An eleclrum piece is worth five silver
anceslor's advenlurous footsteps. pieces, and a plalinum piece is worlh len gold pieces.

STARTlNG WEALTH BY CLASS A standard coin weighs about a lhird of an ounce,
so fifty coins weigh a pound.
Class Funds
Barbarian 2d4 x 10 gp STANDARD EXCHANGE RATES
Bard 5d4 x 10 gp
Cleric 5d4 x 10 gp Coin cp sp ep gp pp
Druid 2d4 x 10 gp Copper (cp) 1 1/10 l/50 1/100 1/1,000
Fighter 5d4 x 10 gp Silver (sp)
Monk Eleclrum (ep) 10 1 1/5 1/10 1/100
Paladin 5d4 gp Gold (gp) 50 5 1 1/2 1/20
Ranger 5d4xl0gp Platinum (pp) 100 10 2 1 1/10
Rogue 5d4xl0gp 1,000 100 10 1
Sorcerer 4d4x10gp 20
Warlock 3d4 x 10 gp
Wizard 4d4 x 10 gp
4d4 x 10 gp

WEALTH

Weallh appears in many forms in a 0&0 world. Coins,
gemslones, lrade goods, art objecls, animais, and
praperly can reftecl your characler's financiai well-being.
Members of lhe peasanlry trade in goods, barlering for
whal lhey need and paying laxes in grain and cheese.

PART I EQUIPME. T 143


SELLING TREASURE The Armar table shows the cost, weight, and other
properties of the common lypes of armor worn in the
Opportunities abound to find treasure, equipment, worlds of D&D.
weapons, armar, and more in the dungeons you explore.
Normally, you can sell your treasures and trinkets when Armor Proficiency. Anyone can put on a suit of armar
you return to a town ar other setllement, provided that you ar strap a shield to an armo Only those praficient in the
can find buyers and merchants interested in your 1001. armor's use know how to wear it effectively, however.
Your class gives you praficiency with certain types of
Arms, Armor, and Other Equipment. As a general armor.lfyou wear armor that you lack proficiency with,
rule, undamaged weapons, armar, and other equipment you have disadvantage on any ability check, saving
fetch half their cost when sold in a market. Weapons thraw, ar atlack roll that involves Strength or Dexterity,
and armor used by monsters are rarely in good enough and you can't cast spells.
condition to sell.
Armor Class (AC). Armar protects its wearer fram
Magic Items. Selling magic items is prablematic. atlacks. The armar (and shield) you wear determines
Finding someone to buy a potion or a scroll isn't toa your base Armar Class.
hard, but other ilems are out of the realm of most but the
wealthiest nobles. Likewise, aside fram a few common Heavy Armor. Heavier armor interferes with the
magic items, you won't normally come across magic wearer's ability to move quickly, stealthily, and freely.
items ar spells to purchase. The value of magic is far lf the Armor table shows "Str 13" ar "Str 15" in the
beyond simple gold and should always be treated as such. Strength column for an armar type, the armar reduces
the wearer's speed by 10 feet unless the wearer has a
Gems,jewe1ry, and Art Objects. These items retain Strength score equal to or higher than the listed score.
their full value in the marketplace, and you can either
trade them in for coin ar use them as currency for other Stealth. lf the Armar table shows "Disadvanlage" in
lransactions. For exceptionally valuable treasures, the the Stealth column, the wearer has disadvantage on
DM might require you to find a buyer in a large town ar Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
larger community first.
Shields. A shield is made fram wood ar metal and
Trade Goods. On the borderlands, many people is carried in one hand. Wielding a shield increases
conduct transactions through barter. Like gems and art your Armar Class by 2. Vou can benefit from only one
objects, trade goods-bars of iran, bags of salt, Iivestock, shield at a time.
and so on-relain lheir full value in the market and can
be used as currency. LIGHTARMOR

ARMOR AND SHIELDS Made fram supple and thin materiais, light armor favors
agile adventurers since it offers some pratection without
D&D worlds are a vast tapestry made up of many sacrificing mobility. If you wear light armar, you add
different cultures, each with its own technology leveI. your Dexterity modifier to the base number from your
For this reason, adventurers have access to a variety armar type to determine your Armar Class.
of armor types, ranging from leather armor to chain
mail to costly plate armar, with several other kinds of Padded. Padded armar consists of quilted layers of
armor in between. The Armor table collects the most cloth and batting.
commonly available types of armar found in the game
and separates them into three calegories: light armor, Leather. The breastplate and shoulder protectors of
medium armar, and heavy armar. Many warriors this armor are made of leather that has been stiffened
supplement their armar with a shield. by being boiled in oil. The rest of the armar is made of
softer and more flexible materiaIs.
•• ••
Studded Leather. Made from tough but flexible
VARIANT: EQUIPMENT SIZES leather, studded leather is reinforced with close-set
rivets ar spikes .
In most campaigns, you can use ar wear any equipment that
you find on your adventures, within the bounds of common MEDIUM ARMOR
sense. For example, a burly haif.orc won't fit in a halfling's
leather armar, and a gnome would be swallowed up in a Medium armar offers more pratection than light armar,
c10ud giant's elegant robe. but il also impairs movement more.lfyou wear medium
armor, you add your Dexlerity modifier, to a maximum
The DM can impose more realism. For example, a suit of of +2, to the base number fram your armor type to
plate armar made for one human might not fit another one determine your Armar Class.
without significant alterations, and a guard's uniform mighl
be visibly ill.fitting when an adventurer tries to wear it as a Hide. This crude armor consists of thick furs and
pelts. lt is commonly worn by barbarian tribes, evil
disguise. humanoids, and other folk who lack access to the tools
and materiaIs needed lOcreate betler armor.
Using this variant, when adventurers find armar, c1othing.
Chain Shirt. Made of interlocking metal rings, a chain
and similar items that are made to be worn, they might need shirl is worn belween layers of clothing ar leather. This
armor offers modest protection to the wearer's upper
to visit an armorsmith, tailor, leatherworker, ar similar exper! body and allows lhe sound of the rings rubbing against
one another to be muffled by outer layers.
to make the item wearable. The cost for such work varies
ScaleMail.This armar consists of a coat and leggings
from 10 to 40 percent ofthe market price ofthe item. The (and perhaps a separate skirt) of leather covered with

DM can either rollld4 x 10 ar determine the increase in cost

based on the extent of the alterations required.

•-•-•-•------------------ r•.

PART 1 I EQUIPMENT


overlapping pieces of metal, much like the scales of a
fish, The suit includes gauntlets,

Breastp/ate. This armor consists of a fitted metal
chest piece worn with supple leather, Although it leaves
the legs and arms relatively unprotected, this armor
provides good protection for the wearer's vital organs
while leaving the wearer relatively unencumbered,

Ha/fP/ate. Half plate consists of shaped metal plates
that cover most of the wearer's body, 1tdoes not include
leg protection beyond simple greaves that are attached
with leather straps.

HEAVY ARMOR

Of al1 the armor categories, heavy armor offers the best
protection. These suits of armor cover the entire body
and are designed to stop a wide range of attacks. Only
proficient warriors can manage their weight and bulk.

Heavy armor doesn't let you add your Dexterity
modifier to your Armor Class, but it also doesn't
penalize you if your Dexterity modifier is nega tive.

Ring Mail. This armor is leather armor with heavy
rings sewn into it. The rings he1p reinforce the armor
against blows from swords and axes. Ring mail is
inferior to chain mail, and it"s usual1y worn only by those
who can't afford better armor.

Chain Mail. Made of interlocking metal rings, chain
mail includes a layer of quilted fabric worn underneath
themail to prevent chafing and to cushion the impact of
blows. The suit includes gauntlets.

Splint. This armor is made of narrow vertical strips
of metal riveted to a backing of leather that is worn over
c10th padding. Flcxible chain mail protects the joints.

P/ate. Plate consists of shaped, interlocking metal
plates to cover the entire body. A suit of plate includes
gauntlets, heavy leather boots, a visored helmet, and
thick layers of padding underneath the armor. Buckles
and straps distribute the weight over the body.

ARMOR Cost Armor Class (AC) Strength Stealth Weight
Disadvantage
Armor 5 gp 11 + Dex modifier Str 13 81b.
Light Armor 10 gp 11 + Dex modifier Str 15 Disadvantage 101b.
45 gp 12 + Dex modifier Str 15 Disadvantage 13lb.
Padded Disadvantage
Leather 10 gp 12 + Dex modifier (max 2) Disadvantage 121b.
Studded leather 50 gp 13 + Dex modifier (ma x 2) Disadvantage 201b.
Medium Armor 50 gp 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) Disadvantage 451b.
Hide 400 gp 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) 201b.
Chain shirt 750 gp 15 + Dex modifier (max 2) 401b.
Seale mai!
Breastplate 30 gp 14 401b.
Half plate 75 gp 16 551b.
HeavyArmor 200 gp 17 601b.
Ring mail 1,500 gp 18 651b.
Chain mail
Splint 10 gp +2 61b.
Plate
Shield
Shield

PART 1 EQUIPMENT

'45


GETTING INTo AND OUT OF ARMOR

The lime il lakes lo don or doff armor depends on lhe
armor's calegory.

Don. This is lhe lime it takes lo pul on armor. Vou
benefil from lhe armor's AC only if you lake lhe full lime
lOdon lhe suil of armor.

Dolf. This is lhe lime il lakes lo lake off armor. lf you
have help, reduce lhis time by half.

DONNING ANO DOFFING ARMOR

Category Oon Ooff
Lighl Armor 1 minute 1 minute
Medium Armor 5 minutes 1 minute
Heavy Armor 10 minutes 5 minutes
Shield 1 action 1 action

WEAPONS

Your class granls proficiency in cerlain weapons,
reflecling boI h lhe class's focus and lhe lools you are
mosl likely lo use. Whelher you favor a longsword or
a longbow, your weapon and your abilily lo wield il
effeclively can mean lhe difference belween tife and
dealh while advenluring.

The Weapons lable shows lhe mosl common weapons
used in lhe worlds of 0&0, lheir price and weighl,
lhe damage lhey deal when lhey hil, and any special
properlies lhey possesso Every weapon is classified
as eilher melee or ranged. A melee weapon is used lo
attack a largel wilhin 5 feel of you, whereas a ranged
weapon is used lo attack a largel aI a dislance.

WEAPON PROFICIENCY

Your race, class, and feals can granl you proficiency
wilh cerlain weapons or calegories of weapons. The lwo
calegories are simple and martial. Mosl people can
use sim pIe weapons wilh proficiency. These weapons
include clubs, maces, and olher weapons oflen found in
lhe hands of commoners. Marlial weapons, including
swords, axes, and polearms, require more speciatized
lraining lOuse effeclively. Mosl warriors use marlial
weapons because lhese weapons pul their fighling slyle
and lraining lo besl use.

Proficiency wilh a weapon allows you lo add your
proficiency bonus lo lhe atlack roll for any attack you
make wilh lhat weapon. If you make an atlack roll using
a weapon wilh which you lack proficiency, you do nol
add your proficiency bonus lo lhe atlack roll.

WEAPON PROPERTIES

Many weapons have special properlies relaled lo lheir use,
as shown in lhe Weapons lable.

Ammunition. Vou can use a weapon lhal has lhe
ammunilion properly lo make a ranged attack only if
you have ammunilion lo fire from lhe weapon. Each
time you atlack wilh lhe weapon, you expend one piece
of ammunilion. Orawing lhe ammunition from a quiver,
case, or olher conlainer is parI of lhe atlack. AI lhe
end of lhe baltle, you can recover half your expended
ammunilion by laking a minule lo search lhe battlefield.

PART I I EQUIPMENT


If you use a weapon that has the ammunition property ".
to make a melee attack, you treat the weapon as an
improvised weapon (see "Improvised Weapons" later in /-
the section). A sling must be loaded to deal any damage
when used in this way.

Finesse. When making an attack with a finesse
weapon, you use your choice of your Strength or
Dexterity modifier for the attack and damage rolls. Vou
must use the same modifier for both rolls.

Heavy. Small creatures have disadvantage on attack
rolls with heavy weapons. A heavy weapon's size and
bulk make it toa large for a Small creature to use
effectively.

Light. A light weapon is small and easy to handle,
making it ideal for use when fighting with two weapons.
See the rules for two-weapon fighting in chapter 9.

Loading. Because of the time required to load this
weapon, you can fire only one piece of ammunition
from it when you use an action, bonus action, or reaction
to fire it, regardless of the number of attacks you can
normally make.

Range. A weapon that can be used to make a ranged
attack has a range shown in parentheses after the
ammunition or thrown property. The range lists two
numbers. The first is the weapon's normal range in feet,
and the second indicates the weapon's maximum range.
When attacking a target beyond normal range, you have
disadvantage on the attack rol I. Vou can't attack a target
beyond the weapon's long range.

Reach. This weapon adds 5 feet to your reach when
you attack with it.

Special. A weapon with the special property has
unusual rules governing its use, explained in the
weapon's description (see "Special Weapons" later in
this section).

Thrown. If a weapon has the thrown property, you
can throw the weapon to make a ranged attack. If the
weapon is a melee weapon, you use the same ability
modifier for that attack roll and damage roll that you
would use for a melee attack with the weapon. For
example, ifyou throw a handaxe, you use your Strength,
but if you throw a dagger, you can use either your
Strength or your Dexterity, since the dagger has the
finesse property.

Two.Handed. This weapon requires two hands to use.
Versatile. This weapon can be used with one or two
hands. A damage value in parentheses appears with the
property-the damage when the weapon is used with
two hands to make a melee attack.

IMPROVISED WEAPONS

Sometimes characters don't have their weapons and
have to attack with whatever is dose at hand. An
improvised weapon indudes any object you can wield
in one or two hands, such as broken glass, a table leg, a
frying pan, a wagon wheel, or a dead goblin.

In many cases, an improvised weapon is similar
to an actual weapon and can be treated as such. For
example, a table leg is akin to a dub. At the DM's option.
a character proficient with a weapon can use a similar
object as if it were that weapon and use his or her
proficiency bonus.

PART 1 EQUIPMENT

147


An object that bears no resemblance to a weapon creatures that are formless, or creatures that are Huge
deals ld4 damage (the DM assigns a damage type or larger. A creature can use its action to make a DC 10
Strength check, freeing itself or another creature within
appropriate to the object). Ir a characler uses a ranged its reach on a success. Dealing 5 slashing damage to the
net (AC 10) also frees the creature without harming it,
weapon lo make a melee atlack, or throws a melee ending the effect and destroying the net.
weapon that does not have the thrown property, it also
deals ld4 damage. An improvised thrown weapon has a When you use an action, bonus action, or reaction
normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. to atlack with a net, you can make only one attack
regardless of the number of attacks you can
SILVERED WEAPONS normally make.
Some monsters that have immunity or resistance
to nonmagical weapons are susceptible to silver AnVENTURING GEAR
weapons, so caulious adventurers invest extra coin to
plate their weapons with silver. Vou can silver a single This section describes items that have special rules or
weapon or ten pieces of ammunition for 100 gp. This require further explanation.
cost represents not only the price of the silver, but the
time and expertise needed to add silver to the weapon Acid. As an action, you can splash the contents of
without making it less effective. this vial onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw
the vial up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. In either
SPECIAL WEAPONS case, make a ranged attack against a creature or object,
Weapons with special rules are described here. treating the acid as an improvised weapon. On a hit, the
target takes 2d6 acid damage.
Lance. Vou have disadvantage when you use a lance
to attack a target within 5 feet of you. Also, a lance Alchemist's Fire. This sticky, adhesive fluid ignites
requires two hands to wield when you aren't mounted. when exposed to air. As an action, you can throw this
flask up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. Make a
Net. A Large or smaller creature hit by a net is ranged attack against a creature or object, treating
restrained until it is freed. A net has no effect on

PART 1 I EQUIPMENT
'4.8


Name Cost Damage Weight Properties
Simp!e Melee Weapons
1 sp 1d4 bludgeoning 21b. Light
Club 2 gp 1d4 piercing 1 Ib. Finesse, light, thrown (range 20/60)
Dagger 2sp 1d8 bludgeoning 101b. Two-handed
Greatclub 5 gp 1d6slashing 21b. Light, thrown (range 20/60)
Handaxe 5 sp 1d6 piercing 21b. Thrown (range 30/120)
Javelin 2 gp 1d4 bludgeoning 21b. Light, thrown (range 20/60)
Light hammer 5 gp 1d6 bludgeoning 41b.
Mace 2sp 1d6 bludgeoning 41b. Versatile (1d8)
Quarterstaff 1 gp 1d4 slashing 21b. Light
Sickle 1 gp 1d6 piercing 3 Ib. Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (ld8)
Spear
Unarmed strike 1 bludgeoning
Simp!e Ranged Weapons
Crossbow, light 25 gp ld8 piercing 51b. Ammunition (range 80/320), loading, two.handed
Dart 5 cp 1d4 piercing 1/4Ib. Finesse, thrown (range 20/60)
Shortbow 1d6 piercing Ammunition (range 80/320), two.handed
Sling 25 gp 1d4 bludgeoning 21b. Ammunition (range 30/120)
Martia! Melee Weapons 1 sp
Battleaxe
Flail 10 gp 1d8slashing 41b. Versatile (ld10)
Glaive 10 gp 1d8 bludgeoning 21b.
Greataxe 20 gp 1dl O slashing 61b. Heavy, reach, two-handed
Greatsword 30 gp 1d12 slashing 71b. Heavy, two-handed
Halberd 50 gp 2d6slashing 61b. Heavy, two.handed
Lance 20 gp 1d10 slashing 61b. Heavy, reach, two.handed
Longsword 10 gp 1d12 piercing 61b. Reach, special
Maul 15 gp 1d8 slashing 31b. Versatile (ldl0)
Morningstar 10 gp 2d6 bludgeoning 101b. Heavy, two.handed
Pike 15 gp 1d8 piercing 41b.
Rapier 1d10 piercing 181b. Heavy, reach, two.handed
Scimitar 5 gp 1d8 piercing 21b. Finesse
Shortsword 25 gp 1d6slashing 31b. Finesse, light
Trident 25 gp 1d6 piercing 21b. Finesse, light
War pick 10 gp ld6 piercing 41b. Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (ld8)
Warhammer ld8 piercing 21b.
Whip 5 gp 1d8 bludgeoning 21b. Versatile (ld10)
Martial Ranged Weapons 5 gp 1d4slashing 31b. Finesse, reach
Blowgun 15 gp
Crossbow, hand 2 gp
Crossbow, heavy
Longbow 10 gp 1 piercing 11b. Ammunition (range 25/100), loading
Ne! 75 gp 1d6 piercing 31b. Ammunition (range 30/120), light, loading
50 gp 1dlO piercing 181b. Ammunition (range 100/400), heavy, loading, two.handed
50 gp 1d8 piercing 21b. Ammunition (range 150/600), heavy, two-handed
31b. Special, thrown (range 5/15)
1 gp

PARl I EQUIPMENT 149
Item Cost Weight Item Cost Weight
Abacus 2 gp 21b. Ho/y symbo/ 1 Ib.
Acid (vial) 25 gp 1 Ib. 5 gp 21b.
Alchemist's fire (flask) 50 gp 1 Ib. Amulet 5 gp llb.
Ammunition Emblem 5 gp 1 Ib.
1 gp 1 Ib. Reliquary 25 gp
Arrows (20) 1 gp llb. Holy water (flask) 25 gp 251b.
Blowgun needles (50) 1 gp 1'/2 Ib. Hourglass 5 gp
Crossbow bolts (20) 4 cp 1'/2 Ib. Hunting trap 10 gp 101b.
Sling bullets (20) 50 gp Ink (1 ounce bottle) 2 cp 1/4Ib.
Antitoxin (vial) llb. Ink pen 2 cp
Arcane Jocus 10 gp 31b. Jug or pitcher 1 sp 31b.
Crystal 20 gp 21b. Ladder (10-foot) 5 sp 51b.
Orb 10 gp 41b. Lamp 10 gp llb.
Rod llb. Lantern, bullseye 5 gp 201b.
Staff 5 gp 51b. Lantern, hooded 10 gp llb.
Wand 10 gp 21b. Lock 100 gp llb.
Backpack 701b. Magnifying glass 2 gp
Ball bearings (bag of 1 000) 2 gp 21b. Manacles 2 sp
Barrei 1 gp 71b. Mess kit 5 gp
Basket 2 gp Mirror, steel 1 sp
Bedroll 4 sp 31b. Oil (flask) 2 sp
Bell 1 gp 51b. Paper (one sheet) 1 sp
Blanket 1 gp 51b. Parchment (one sheet) 5 gp
Block and tackle 5 sp 21b. Perfume (vial) 2 gp
Book 1 gp 21b. Piek, miner's 5 cp
Botlle, glass 25 gp 21b. Piton 100 gp
Bucket 2 gp Poison, basic (vial) 5 cp
Caltrops (bag of 20) 5 cp 1 Ib. Pole (10-foot) 2 gp
Candle 1 gp llb. Pot, iron 50 gp
Case, crossbow bolt 1 cp 10 Ib. Polion oJhealing 5 sp
Case, map or scroll 1 gp Pouch 1 gp
Chain (10 feet) 1 gp 251b. Quiver 4 gp
Chalk (l piece) 5 gp 121b. Ram, portable 5 sp
Chest 1 cp 31b. Rations (l day) 1 gp
Climber's kit 5 gp 41b. Robes 1 gp
Clothes, common 25 gp 61b. Rope, hempen (50 feet) 10 gp
Clothes, costume 5 sp 41b. Rope, silk (50 feet) 1 cp
Clothes, fine 5 gp 21b. Sack 5 gp
Clothes, traveler's 15 gp 51b. Scale, merchant's 5 sp
Component pouch 2 gp Sealing wax 2 gp
Crowbar 25 gp 41b. Shovel 5 cp
Druidic Jocus 2 gp 1 Ib. Signal whistle 5 gp
Sprig of mistletoe 41b. Signe! ring 2 cp
Totem 1 gp 1 Ib. Soap 50 gp
Wooden staff 1 gp 41b. Spellbook 1 gp
Yew wand 5 gp 31b. Spikes, iron (10) 1,000 gp
Fishing tackle 10 gp 101b. Spyglass 2 gp
Flask or tankard 1 gp 31b. Tent, two-person 5 sp
Grappling hook 2 cp Tinderbox 1 cp
Hammer 2 gp Torch 1 gp
1 gp Vial 2 sp
PART I I EQUIPMENT 2 gp Waterskin 1 cp
5 gp Whetstone


the alchemist's tire as an improvised weapon. On a Druidic Focus. A druidic focus might be a sprig of
hit, the target takes Id4 tire damage at the start of mistletoe or holly, a wand or scepter made of yew or
each of its turns. A creature can end this damage by another special wood, a staff drawn whole out of a living
using its action to make a DC 10 Dexterity check to tree, or a totem object incorporating feathers, fur, bones,
extinguish the liames. and teeth from sacred animaIs. A druid can use such an
object as a spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10.
Antitoxin. A creature that drinks this viaI of liquid
gains advantage on saving throws against poison for I Fishing Tackle. This kit includes a wooden rod, silken
hour. lt confers no benetit to undead or constructs. line, corkwood bobbers, steel hooks, lead sinkers, velvet
lures, and narrow netting.
Arcane Focus. An arcane focus is a special item-
an orb, a crystal, a rod, a specially constructed staff, Healer's Kit. This kit is a leather pouch containing
a wand.like length ofwood, or some similar item- bandages, salves, and splints. The kit has ten uses. As
designed to channel the power of arcane spells. A an action, you can expend one use of the kit to stabilize
sorcerer, warlock, or wizard can use such an item as a a creature that has O hit points, without needing to make
spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10. a Wisdom (Medicine) check.

Bal/ Bearings. As an action, you can spill these tiny Holy Symbol. A holy symbol is a representation of
metal balls from their pouch to cover a levei area 10 a god or pantheon. lt might be an amulet depicting a
feet square. A creature moving across the covered area symbol representing a deity, the same symbol carefully
must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or fali engraved or inlaid as an emblem on a shield, or a tiny
prone. A creature moving through the area at half speed box holding a fragment of a sacred relic. Appendix B
doesn't need to make the saving throw. lists the symbols commonly associated with many gods
in the multiverse. A cleric or paladin can use a holy
Block and Tackle. A set of pulleys with a cable symbol as a spellcasting focus, as described in chapter
threaded through them and a hook to attach to objects, a lO. To use the symbol in this way, the caster must hold it
block and tackle allows you to hoist up to four times the in hand, wear it visibly, or bear it on a shield.
weight you can normally lift.
Holy Water. As an action, you can splash the contents
Book. A book might contain poetry, historical of this lIask onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw
accounts, information pertaining to a particular tield it up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. In either case,
of lore, diagrams and notes on gnomish contraptions, make a ranged attack against a target creature, treating
or just about anything else that can be represented the holy water as an improvised weapon. If the target is
using text or pictures. A book of spells is a spellbook a tiend or undead, it takes 2d6 radiant damage.
(described later in this section).
4,
Caltrops. As an action, you can spread a single bag
of caltrops to cover a 5-foot-square area. Any creature EQUIPMENT PACKS
that enters the area must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity
saving throw or stop moving and take I piercing lhe starting equipmenl you gel fram your elass ineludes a
damage. Unti! the creature regains at least I hit point, colleclion of useful advenluring gear, pullogelher in a pack.
its walking speed is reduced by 10 feet. A creature lhe conlenls oflhese packs are Iisled here. Ifyou are buying
moving through the area at half speed doesn't need to your slarling equipmenl, you can purchase a pack for lhe
make the saving throw. price shown, which mighl be cheaper lhan buying lhe ilems
individually.
Candle. For I hour, a candle sheds bright light in a
5.foot radius and dim light for an additional 5 feet. Surglar's Pack (16 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a bag of 1,000
ball bearings, 10 feel of slring, a bell, 5 candles, a crowbar, a
Case, Crossbow Bolt. This wooden case can hold up hammer, 10 pilons, a hooded lanlern, 2 ftasks of oil, 5 days
to twenty crossbow bolts. ralions, a linderbox, and a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50
feel of hempen rope slrapped lo lhe side of it.
Case, Map or Scrol/. This cylindricalleather case can
hold up to ten rolled-up sheets of paper or tive rolled-up Diplomat's Pack (39 gp). Ineludes a chesl, 2 cases for maps
sheets of parchment. and scrolls, a seI offine elolhes, a bollle ofink, an ink pen,
a lamp, 2 flasks of oil, 5 sheels of paper, aviai of perfume,
Chain. A chain has 10 hit points. lt can be burst with a sealing wax, and soap.
successful DC 20 Strength check.
Dungeoneer's Pack (12 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a crowbar,
Climber's Kit. A climber's kit includes special pitons, a hammer, 10 pilons, 10 lorches, a linderbox, 10 days
boot tips, gloves, and a harness. You can use the of ralions, and a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50 feel of
climber's kit as an action to anchor yourself; when you hempen rope slrapped lo lhe side of il.
do, you can't fali more than 25 feet from the point where
you anchored yourself, and you can't climb more than 25 Entertainer's Pack (40 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a bedrall,
feet away from that point without undoing the anchor. 2 coslumes, 5 candles, 5 days of ralions, a walerskin, and a
disguise kil.
Component Pouch. A component pouch is a small,
watertight leather belt pouch that has compartments Explorer's Pack (10 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a bedrall,
to hold ali the material components and other special a mess kil, a linderbox, 10 lorches, 10 days of ralions, and
items you need to cast your spells, except for those a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50 feel ofhempen rape
components that have a specitic cost (as indicated in a slrapped lo lhe side of il.
spell's description).
Priest's Pack (19 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a blankel, 10
Crowbar. Using a crowbar granls advantage candles, a linderbox, an alms box, 2 blocks ofincense, a
to Strength checks where the crowbar's leverage censer, veslmenls, 2 days of ralions, and a walerskin.
can be applied.
Scholar's Pack (40 gp). Includes a backpack, a book aflore,
a boltle ofink, an ink pen, 10 sheels ofparchmenl, a lillle
bag of sand, and a small knife.

~~

PART I EQUIP fENT


A cleric ar paladin may create holy water by Magnifying Glass. This lens allows a closer look at
performing a special ritual. The ritual takes 1 hour small objects. It is also useful as a substitute for flint
to perform, uses 25 gp worth of powdered silver, and and steel when starting tires. Lighting a /ire with a
requires the caster to expend a 1st-levei spell slot. magnifying glass requires light as bright as sunlight to
focus, tinder to ignite, and about 5 minutes for the /ire
Hunting Trap. When you use your action to set it, to ignite. A magnifying glass grants advantage on any
this trap forms a saw-toothed steel ring that snaps shut ability check made to appraise ar inspect an item that is
when a creature steps on apressure plate in the center. small ar highly detailed.
The trap is affixed bya heavy chain to an immobi!e
object, such as a tree ar a spike driven into the ground. Manacles. These metal restraints can bind a 5mall
A creature that steps on the plate must succeed on a DC ar Medium creature. Escaping the manacles requires
13 Dexterity saving throw ar take Id4 piercing damage a successful DC 20 Dexterity check. Breaking them
and stop moving. Thereafter, unti! the creature breaks requires a successful DC 20 5trength check. Each
free of the trap, its movement is limited by the length set of manacles comes with one key. Without the key,
of the chain (typically 3 feet long). A creature can use a creature pro/icient with thieves' tools can pick the
its action to make a DC 13 5trength check, freeing manacles' lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity
itself ar another creature within its reach on a success. check. Manacles have 15 hit points.
Each fai!ed check deals 1 piercing damage to the
trapped creature. Mess Kit. This tin box contains a cup and simple
cutlery. The box clamps together, and one side can
Lamp. A lamp casts bright light in a 15-foot radius be used as a cooking pan and the other as a plate ar
and dim light for an additional 30 feet. Once lit, il burns shallow bowl.
for 6 hours on a flask (1 pint) of oil.
Oi/. Oi! usually comes in a clay flask that holds 1
Lantern, Bul/seye. A bullseye lantern casts bright pinto As an action, you can splash the oi! in this flask
light in a 60-foot cone and dim light for an additional 60 anta a creature within 5 feet of you ar throw it up to
feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 pint) of oil. 20 feet, shattering it on impacto Make a ranged attack
against a target creature ar object, treating the oi! as
Lantern, Hooded. A hooded lantern casts bright light an improvised weapon. On a hit, the target is covered
in a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 in oil. If the larget takes any /ire damage before the oi!
feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 pinl) of dries (after 1 minute), the target takes an additional 5
oil. As an action, you can lower the hood, reducing the /ire damagc from the burning oil. Vou can also pour a
light lo dim light in a 5-foot radius. flask of oi! on the ground to cover a 5-foot-square area,

Lock. A key is provided with the lock. Without the provided that the surface is leveI. Ir lit. the oi! burns for
key, a creature proticient with thieves' toois can pick
this lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. 2 rounds and deals 5 tire damage to any creature that
Vour DM may decide that better locks are available enters the area ar ends its turn in the area, A creature
for higher prices. can take this damage only once per turno

PART 1 I EQUIPMENT


Poison, Basic. Vou can use the poison in Ihis via I SpYI1/ass. Objeets viewed through a spyglass are
lOcoat one slashing or piercing weapon or up to three magnitied to twice their size.
pieces of ammunition. Applying the poison takes
an action. A creature hit by the poisoned weapon or Tent. A simple and portable canvas shelter, a
ammunition must make a DC 10 Constitution saving tent sleeps two.
throw or take 1d4 poison damage. Once applied, the
poison retains potency for I minute before drying. Tinderbox. This small container holds fiint, tire steel,
and tinder (usually dry c10th soaked in Iight oil) used lo
Potion ofHeaJinl1. A character who drinks the magical kindle a tire. Using it to Iight a torch-or anything else
red fiuid in this vial regains 2d4 + 2 hit points. Drinking with abundant, exposed fuel-takes an action. Lighting
or administering a potion takes an action. any olher tire takes 1 minute.

Pouch. A c10th or leather pouch can hold up to 20 Torch. A torch burns for 1 hour, providing bright Iight
sling bullets or 50 blowgun needles, among other in a 20.foot radius and dim light for an additional 20
things. A compartmentalized pouch for holding spell fee!. If you make a melee attack with a burning torch
components is called a component pouch (described and hit, it deals 1 tire damage.
earlier in this section).
CONTAINER CAPACITY
Quiver. A quiver can hold up to 20 arrows.
Ram, Portable. Vou can use a portable ram to break Container Capacily
down doors. When doing so, you gain a +4 bonus on the Backpack* 1 cubic f001/30 pounds of gear
Strength check. One other character can help you use Barrei 40 gallons liquid, 4 cubic feel solid
the ram, giving you advantage on this check. Basket 2 cubic feel/40 pounds of gear
Rations. Rations consist of dry foods suitable Bottle 1112 pinls liquid
for extended travei, including jerky, dried fruit, Bucket 3 gallons liquid, 1/2 cubic fool solid
hardlack, and nuts. Chest 12 cubic feel/300 pounds of gear
Rope. Rope, whether made of hemp or silk, has 2 hit Flask ar lankard 1 pinlliquid
points and can be burst with a DC 17 Strenglh check. Jug ar pilcher 1 gallon liquid
Sca/e, Merchant's. A scale includes a small balance, PaI, iran 1 gallon liquid
pans, and a suitable assortment of weights up to 2 Pouch 1/5 cubic f001/6 pounds of gear
pounds. With it, you can measure the exact weight of Sack 1 cubic f001/30 pounds of gear
small objects, such as raw precious metais or trade Via I 4 ounces liquid
goods, to help determine their worth. Walerskin 4 pinls liquid
SpeJlbook. Essential for wizards, a spellbook is
a lealher.bound tome wilh 100 blank vellum pages )'C You can al50 strap items, such as a bedroll ar a coil af rape,
suitable for recording spells. to lhe oulside of a backpack.

PART I EQUII'MENT

153


TOOLS Artisan's Too/s. These special tools inc1ude the items
needed to pursue a craft or trade. The table shows
A to01helps you to do something you couldn't otherwise examples of the most common types of tools, each
do, such as craft or repair an item, forge a document, or providing items related to a single craft. Proficiency
pick a lock. Your race, c1ass, background, or feats give with a set of artisan's tools lets you add your proficiency
you proficiency with certa in tools. Proficiency with a to01 bonus to any ability checks you make using the tools
allows you to add your proficiency bonus to any ability in your craft. Each type of artisan's tools requires a
check you make using that tool. Too! use is not tied to separate proficiency.
a single ability, since proficiency with a tool represents
broader knowledge of its use. For example, the DM Disl1uise Kit. This pouch of cosmetics, hair dye, and
might ask you to make a Dexterity check to carve a fine small props lets you create disguises that change your
detail with your woodcarver's tools, or a Strength check physical appearance. Proficiency with this kit lets you
to make something out of particularly hard wood. add your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you
make to create a visual disguise.
TOOlS
Forl1ery Kit. This small box contains a variety of
Item Cost Weight papers and parchments, pens and inks, seals and
sealing wax, gold and silver leaf, and other supplies
Arlisan's lools 81b. necessary to create convincing forgeries of physica!
91b. documents. Proficiency with this kit lets you add your
Alchemist's supplies 50 gp 51b. proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make to
61b. create a physical forgery of a document.
Brewer's supplies 20 gp 61b.
51b. Gaminl1 Set. This item encompasses a wide range
Calligrapher's supplies 10 gp 81b. of game pieces, inc1uding dice and decks of cards (for
51b. games such as Three-Dragon Ante). A few common
Carpenter's tools 8 gp 21b. examples appear on the Tools table, but other kinds of
51b. gaming sets exist. If you are proficient with a gaming
Cartographer's tools 15 gp. 81b. set, you can add your proficiency bonus to ability checks
51b. you make to play a game with that set. Each type of
Cobbler's tools 5 gp 31b. gaming set requires a separate proficiency.
81b.
Cook's utensils 1 gp 101b. HerbaJism Kit. This kit contains a variety of
51b. instruments such as c1ippers, morta r and pestIe, and
Glassblower's tools 30 gp 51b. pouches and vials used by herbalists to create remedies
31b. and potions. Proficiency with this kit lets you add your
Jeweler's tools 25 gp 51b. proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make to
identify or apply herbs. AIso, proficiency with this kit is
Leatherworker's tools 5 gp 1/2Ib.
orrequired to create antitoxin and polions healinl1.
Mason's tools 10 gp 31b.
Musica/lnstrument. Several of the most common
Painter's supplies 10 gp 61b. types of musical instruments are shown on the table as
31b.
Potter's tools 10 gp 101b. examples. Ir you have proficiency with a given musical
1 Ib.
Smith's tools 20 gp 21b. instrument, you can add your proficiency bonus to
21b. any ability checks you make to play music with the
Tinker's tools 50 gp 21b. instrumento A bard can use a musical instrument as a
21b. spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10. Each type
Weaver's tools 1 gp llb. of musical instrument requires a separate proficiency.
llb.
Woodcarver's tools 1 gp 21b. Navil1ator's Too/s. This set of instruments is used
21b. for navigation at sea. Proficiency with navigator's tools
Disguise kit 25 gp 1 Ib. lets you chart a ship's course and follow navigation
charts. In addition, these tools allow you to add your
Forgery kit 15 gp * proficiency bonus to any ability check you make to avoid
getting lost at sea.
Gaming seI
Poisoner's Kit. A poisoner's kit inc1udes the vials,
Dice set 1 sp chemicals, and other equipment necessary for the
creation of poisons. Proficiency with this kit lets you add
Dragonchess set 1 gp your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make to
craft or use poisons.
Playing card set 5sp
Thieves' Too/s. This set of tools inc1udes a small file,
Three-Dragon Ante set 1 gp a set of lock picks, a small mirror mounted on a metal
handle, a set of narrow-bladed scissors, and a pair of
Herbalism kit 5 gp pliers. Proficiency with these tools lets you add your
proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make to
Musical instrument disarm traps or open locks.

Bagpipes 30 gp

Drum 6 gp

Dulcimer 25 gp

Flute 2 gp

Lute 35 gp

Lyre 30 gp

Horn 3 gp

Pan Rute 12 gp

Shawm 2 gp

Viol 30 gp

Navigator's tools 25 gp

Poisoner's kit 50 gp

Thieves' tools 25 gp

Vehicles (Iand ar water) "

* See the "Mounts and Vehicles" section.

PART I I EQUIPMENT
15+


MOUNTS AND VEHICLES

A good mount can help you move more quickly through
the wilderness, but its primary purpose is to carry the
gear that would otherwise slow you down. The Mounts
and Other Animais table shows each animal's speed and
base carrying capacity.

An animal pulling a carriage, cart, chariot, sled,
or wagon can move weight up to tive times its base
carrying capacity, inc1uding the weight of the vehic1e.
If multiple animais pull the same vehic1e, they can add
their carrying capacity together.

Mounts other than those listed here are available in
the worlds of 0&0, but they are rare and not normally
available for purchase. These inc1ude flying mounts
(pegasi, griffons, hippogriffs, and similar animaIs) and
even aquatic mounts (giant sea horses, for example).
Acquiring such a mount often means securing an egg
and raising the creature yourself, making a bargain with
a powerful entity, or negotiating with the mount itself.

Barding. Barding is armor designed to protect an
animal's head, neck, chest, and body. Any type of
armor shown on the Armor table in this chapter can
be purchased as barding. The cost is four times the
equivalent armor made for humanoids, and it weighs
twice as much.

SaddJes. A military saddle braces the rider, helping
you keep your seat on an active mount in battle. 1t
gives you advantage on any check you make to remain
mounted. An exotic saddle is required for riding any
aquatic or flying mount.

VehicJe Proficiency. Ifyou have proticiency with a
certain kind of vehic1e (land or water), you can add your
proticiency bonus to any check you make to control that
kind of vehic1e in difficult circumstances.

Rowed Vesse1s. Keelboats and rowboats are used OH
lakes and rivers. If going downstream, add the speed of
the current (typically 3 miles per hour) to the speed of

55


lhe vehicle. These vehicles can'l be rowed againsl any TRADE GOODS
significanl currenl, bUllhey can be pulled upslream
by drafl animais on lhe shores. A rowboal weighs 100 CosI Goods
pounds, in case advenlurers carry il over land. 1 cp 1 ib. of wheat
2 cp 1 ib. of fiour or one chicken
MOUNTS ANO OTHER ANIMALS 5 cp 1 ib. of sall
1 sp 1 Ib. ofiron or 1 sq. yd. of canvas
Ilem CosI Speed Carrying 5sp 1 Ib. of copper or 1 sq. yd. of colton eloth
Camel 50 gp 50 fI. Capacily 1 gp 1 Ib. of ginger or one goat
Donkey or mule 40 fI. 2 gp 1 Ib. of cinnamon or pepper, or one sheep
Elephanl 8 gp 40 fI. 4801b. 3 gp 1 Ib. of c10ves or one pig
Horse, drafl 200 gp 40 ft. 4201b. 5 gp 1 Ib. of silver or 1 sq. yd. oflinen
Horse, riding 60 fI. 1,320Ib. 10 gp 1 sq. yd. of silk or one eow
Masliff 50 gp 40 fI. 5401b. 15 gp 1 Ib. of saffron or one ox
Pony 75 gp 40 ft. 4801b. 50 gp 1 Ib. of gold
Warhorse 25 gp 60 fI. 1951b. 500 gp 1 Ib. of plalinum
30 gp 2251b.
400 gp 5401b.

TACK, HARNESS, ANO DRAWN VEHICLES Weighl EXPENSES
x2
Ilem CosI When not descending into lhe depths of the earth,
Barding x4 llb. exploring ruins for lost treasures, or waging war againsl
Bil and bridle 6001b. the encroaching darkness, adventurers face more
Carriage 2 gp 2001b. mundane realities. Even in a fanlastical world, people
Carl 100 gp 1001b. require basic necessilies such as shelter, sustenance,
Chariol and clothing. These things cost money, allhough some
Feed (per day) 15 gp 101b. lifestyles cosI more lhan others.
$addle 250 gp
401b. LIFESTYLE EXPENSES
Exolic 5 cp 301b.
Mililary 151b. Lifeslyle expenses provide you with a simple way lo
Pack 60 gp 251b. accounl for the cost of living in a fantasy world. They
Riding 20 gp cover your accommodations, food and drink, and ali
Saddiebags 81b. your olher necessities. Furthermore, expenses cover the
Sled 5 gp 3001b. cosi of maintaining your equipment so you can be ready
Slabling (per day) 10 gp when advenlure nexl calls.
Wagon 4 gp 4001b.
20 gp At lhe slart of each week or month (your choice),
choose a lifeslyle from the Expenses lable and pay the
5sp price to sustain lhat lifeslyle. The prices lisled are per
35 gp day, so if you wish lo calculate the cosI of your chosen
lifestyle over a thirly-day period, multiply the listed price
WATERBORN E VEH ICLES CosI Speed by 30. Your lifestyle might change from one period lo
30,000 gp 4 mph lhe next, based on lhe funds you have aI your disposal,
Ilem 1 mph or you might maintain lhe same lifestyle throughout
Galley 3,000 gp 3 mph your character's career.
Keelboal 10,000 gp llf2 mph
Longship 2 mph Your Iifestyle choice can have consequences.
Rowboal 50 gp 2'12 mph Mainlaining a weallhy lifestyle might help you make
Sailing ship 10,000 gp contacts with the rich and powerful, though you run the
Warship 25,000 gp risk of altracting thieves. Likewise, living frugally might
help you avoid criminais, but you are unlikely lo make
TRADE GOODS powerful conneclions.

Mosl weallh is nol in coins. It is measured in liveslock, LIFESTYLE EXPENSES
grain, land, righlS lo collecllaxes, or righls lo resources
(such as a mine or a fores I). Lifeslyle Price/Day
Wrelehed
Guilds, nobles, and royally regulale trade. Charlered Squalid 1 sp
companies are granled righls to conducl trade along Poor 2sp
certain routes, to send merchant ships to various ports, Modesl 1 gp
or to buy or sell specific goods. Guilds set prices for Comforlable 2 gp
lhe goods or services lhat lhey conlrol, and determine Weallhy 4 gp
who may or may nol offer lhose goods and services. 10 gp minimum
Merchanls commonly exchange trade goods without Aristocratic
using currency. The Trade Goods table shows the value
of commonly exchanged goods.

PART 1 EQUIP lENT 157


Wretehed. Vou live in inhumane conditions. With ComfortabJe. Choosing a comfortable lifestyle
no place to call home, you shelter wherever you can, means that you can afford nicer clothing and can easily
sneaking into barns, huddling in old crates, and relying maintain your equipment. Vou live in a small cottage
on the goad graces of people better off than you. A in a middle-class neighborhood or in a private room
wretched lifestyle presents abundant dangers. Violence, at a fine inn. Vou associate with merchants, skilled
disease, and hunger follow you wherever you go. Other tradespeople, and military officers.
wretched people cavet your armor, weapons, and
adventuring gear, which represent a fortune by their Wea1thy. Choosing a wealthy lifestyle means living a
standards. Vou are beneath the notice of most people. life of !uxury, though you might not have achieved the
social status associated with the old money of nobility
SquaJid. Vou live in a leaky stable, a mud-floored hut or royalty. Vou live a lifestyle comparable to that of a
just outside town, or a vermin-infested boarding house highly successful merchant, a favored servant of the
in the worst part of town. Vou have shelter from the royalty, or the owner of a few small businesses. Vou
elements, but you live in a desperate and often vialent have respectable lodgings, usually a spacious home in
environment, in places rife with disease, hunger, and a good part of town or a comfortable suite at a fine inn.
misfortune. Vou are beneath the notice of most people, Vou likely have a small staff of servants.
and you have few legal protections. Most people at
this lifestyle levei have suffered some terrible setback. Aristoeratie. Vou live a life of plenty and comfort. Vou
They might be disturbed, marked as exiles, or suffer move in circles populated by the most powerful people
from disease. in the community. Vou have excellent lodgings, perhaps
a townhouse in the nicest part of town or rooms in the
Poor. A poor lifestyle means going without the finest inn. Vou dine at the best restaurants, retain the
comforts available in a stable community. Simple food most skilled and fashionable tailor, and have servants
and lodgings, threadbare clothing, and unpredictable attending to your every need. Vou receive invitations
conditions result in a sufficient, though probably to the social gatherings of the rich and powerful, and
unpleasant, experience. Vour accommodations might spend evenings in the company of politicians, guild
be a room in a flophouse or in the common room above leaders, high priests, and nobility. Vou must also
a tavern. Vou benefit from some legal protections, contend with the highest leveIs of deceit and treachery.
but you still have to contend with violence, crime, The wealthier you are, the greater the chance you will
and disease. People at this lifestyle levei tend to be be drawn into political intrigue as a pawn or participant.
unskilled laborers, costermongers, peddlers, thieves,
mercenaries, and other disreputable types. FOOD, DRINK, AND LODGING

Modest. A modest lifestyle keeps you out of the slums The Food, Drink, and Lodging table gives prices for
and ensures that you can maintain your equipment. individual food items and a single night's lodging. These
Vou live in an 01der part of town, renting a room in a prices are included in your totallifestyle expenses.
boarding house, inn, or temple. Vou don't go hungry or
thirsty, and your living conditions are clean, if simple. Fooo, DRINK, ANO LOOGING Cost
Ordinary people living modest lifestyles include soldiers
with families, laborers, students, priests, hedge wizards, Item 2 sp
and the like. Ale 4 cp
10 gp
PART 11 EQUIPMENT Callon 2 cp
Mug 1 sp
Banquet (per person)
Bread, loaf 7 cp
Cheese, hunk 1 sp
Inn stay (per day) 5 sp
Squalid 8 sp
Poor 2 gp
Modest 4 gp
Comfortable
Wealthy 3 cp
Aristocratic 6 cp
Meals (per day) 3 sp
Squalid 5 sp
Poor 8 sp
Modest 2 gp
Comfortable 3 sp
Wealthy
Aristocratic 2 sp
Meat, chunk 10 gp
Wine
Common (pitcher)
Fine (bottle)


•• ••
SELF-SUFFICIENCY

lhe expenses and lifeslyles deseribed in lhis ehapler assume

lhal you are spending your lime between advenlures in lown,

availing yourself of whalever serviees you ean afford-paying

for food and sheller, paying lownspeople lo sharpen your

sword and repair your armor, and so on. Some eharaelers,

lhough, mighl prefer lo spend lheir lime away from

eivilizalion, suslaining lhemselves in lhe wild by hunling,

foraging, and repairing lheir own gear.

Mainlaining lhis kind oflifeslyle doesn'l require you lO

spend any eoin, bul il is lime.eonsuming. If you spend

your lime between advenlures praelieing a profession, as

deseribed in ehapler 8, you ean eke oul the equivalent of a

poor Iifestyle. Profieieney in the Survival skilllets you live aI

the equivalent of a eomforlable lifestyle . ••

••

SERVICES

Advenlurers can pay nonplayer characters to assist them Skilled hirelings include anyone hired lo perform a
or act on their behalf in a variety of circumstances. Most service that involves a proficiency (including weapon,
such hirelings have fairly ordinary skills, while others tool, or skill): a mercenary, artisan, scribe, and so on.
are masters of a craft or art, and a few are experts with The pay shown is a minimum; some expert hirelings
specialized adventuring skills. require more pay. Untrained hirelings are hired for
menial work that requires no particular skill and can
Some of the most basic types of hirelings appear on include laborers, porters, maids, and similar workers.
the Services table. Other common hirelings include
any of the wide variety of people who inhabit a typical SPELLCASTING SERVICES
town or city, when the adventurers pay them to
perform a specific task. For example, a wizard might People who are able to cast spells don't fali into the
paya carpenter to conslruct an elaborale chest (and category of ordinary hirelings. lt might be possible to
ils miniature replica) for use in the Leomund's secret find someone willing to cast a spell in exchange for coin
chest spell. A fighter might commission a blacksmilh to or favors, but it is rarely easy and no established pay
forge a special sword. A bard mighl pay a tailor lo make rates exisl. As a rule, the higher the leveI of the desired
exquisite clothing for an upcoming performance in spell, the harder it is to find someone who can cast il
front of the duke. and the more it costs.

Olher hirelings provide more expert or dangerous Hiring someone to cast a relatively common spell
services. Mercenary soldiers paid to help the of 1st or 2nd levei, such as cure wounds or identify, is
advenlurers take on a hobgoblin army are hirelings, as easy enough in a city or town, and might cost 10 to 50
are sages hired to research ancient or esoleric lore. If a gold pieces (plus the cost of any expensive material
high-Ievel adventurer establishes a stronghold of some components). Finding someone able and wiHing to
kind, he or she might hire a whole staff of servants and cast a higher-Ievel spell might involve traveling to a
agents to run the place, from a castellan or steward large city, perhaps one with a university or prominent
to meniallaborers lo keep the stables clean. These temple. Once found, lhe spellcaster might ask for a
hirelings often enjoy a long-term contract that includes service instead of payment-the kind of service that
a place to live within lhe stronghold as part of the only adventurers can provide, such as retrieving arare
offered compensation. item from a dangerous locale or traversing a monster-
infested wilderness to deliver somelhing important to
SERVICES Pay a distant settlemenl.

Service 3 cp per mile TRINKETS
Coach cah 1 cp
When you make your character, you can roll once on
Belween lowns 2 gp per day lhe Trinkets table to gain a trinket, a simple item lightly
Wilhin a eily 2 sp per day touched by mystery. The DM might also use this table.
2 cp per mile It can help stock a room in a dungeon or fiHa creature's
Hireling 1 cp pockets.
1 sp per mile
Skilled
Untrained
Messenger
Road or gate 1011
Ship's passage

PART I EQUIPMENT 59


TRINKETS d100 Trinkel
27 A shard of obsidian that always feels warm to the
d100 Trinkel touch
01 A mummified goblin hand 28 A dragon's bony talon hanging from a plain leather
02 A piece of crystal that faintly glows in the moonlight necklace
03 A gold coin minted in an unknown land 29 A pair of old socks
04 A diary written in a language you don't know 30 A blank book whose pages refuse to hold ink, chalk,
05 A brass ring that never tarnishes graphite, or any olher substance or marking
06 An old chess piece made from glass 31 A silver badge in the shape of a five-pointed star
07 A pair ofknucklebone dice, each with a skull symbol 32 A knife lhat belonged to a relative
on the si de thal would normally show six pips 33 A glass via I filled with nail c1ippings
08 A small idol depicting a nightmarish creature that 34 A rectangular metal device with two tiny metal cups
gives you unsettling dreams when you sleep near it on one end that throws sparks when wet
09 A rope necklace from which dangles four mummified 35 A white, sequined glove sized for a human
elf fingers 36 A vest with one hundred liny pockets
10 The deed for a parcel ofland in a realm unknown 37 A small, weightless stone block
to you 38 A tiny sketch portrait of a goblin
11 A l-ounce block made from an unknown material 39 An empty glass vial that smells of perfume when
12 A small c10th doll skewered with needles opened
13 A tooth from an unknown beast 40 A gemstone that looks like a lump of coai when
14 An enormous scale, perhaps from a dragon examined by anyone but you
15 A bright green feather 41 A scrap of c10th from an old banner
16 An old divination card bearing your likeness 42 A rank insignia from a lost legionnaire
17 A glass orb filled with moving smoke 43 A tiny silver bell without a c1apper
18 A 1-pound egg wilh a bright red shell 44 A mechanical canary inside a gnomish lamp
19 A pipe that blows bubbles 45 A tiny chest carved to look like it has numerous feet
20 A glass jar containing a weird bit of fiesh fioating in on the bottom
pickling fiuid 46 A dead sprite inside a clear glass bottle
21 A tiny gnome-crafted music box that plays a song 47 A metal can that has no opening but sounds as if it
you dimly remember from your childhood is filled with liquid, sand, spiders, or broken glass
22 A small wooden statuette of a smug halfiing (your choice)
23 A brass orb etched with strange runes 48 A glass orb filled with water, in which swims a
24 A multicolored stone disk c1ockwork goldfish
25 A tiny silver icon of a raven 49 A silver spoon with an M engraved on the handle
26 A bag containing forty-seven humanoid teeth, one 50 A whistle made from gold-colored wood
of which is rotten

160 PART I I EQUIPMENT


dlOO Trinkel dlOO Trinkel
51 A dead scarab beelle lhe size of your hand 79 An invilalion lO a parly where a murder happened
52 Two loy soldiers, one wilh a missing head 80 A bronze penlaele wilh an elching of a ral's head
53 A small box filled wilh differenl.sized bultons
54 A candle lhal can'l be lil in its center
55 A liny cage wilh no door 81 A purple handkerchief embroidered with lhe name of
56 An old key
57 An indecipherable lreasure map a powerful archmage
58 A hill from a broken sword 82 Half of a floorplan for a lemple, caslle, or some olher
59 A rabbil's fool
60 A glass eye structure
61 A cameo carved in the likeness of a hideous person 83 A bil of folded clolh lhal, when unfolded, lurns inlo
62 A silver skulllhe size of a coin
63 An alabaster mask a slylish cap
64 A pyramid of Slicky black incense thal smells very bad 84 A receipl of deposil aI a bank in a far.flung cily
65 A nighlcap lhal, when worn, gives you pleasanl 85 A diary wilh seven missing pages
dreams 86 An empty silver snuffbox bearing an inscription on
66 A single callrop made from bone
67 A gold monoele frame wilhoullhe lens lhe surface lhal says "dreams"
68 A 1.inch cube, each si de painled a differenl color 87 An iron holy symbol devoled lo an unknown god
69 A cryslal knob from a door 88 A book lhallells lhe slory of a legendary hero's rise
70 A small packel filled wilh pink dusl
71 A fragmenl of a beauliful song, wrilten as musical and fali, wilh lhe lasl chapler missing
noles on lwo pieces of parchmenl 89 Aviai of dragon blood
72 A silver leardrop earring made from a realleardrop 90 An ancienl arrow of elven design
73 The shell of an egg painted wilh scenes of human 91 A needle lhal never bends
misery in dislurbing delail 92 An ornale brooch of dwarven design
74 A fan lhal, when unfolded, shows a sleeping cal 93 An emply wine bollle bearing a prelty labellhal says,
75 A seI of bone pipes
76 A four.leaf elover pressed inside a book discussing "The Wizard ofWines Winery, Red Dragon Crush,
manners and eliquelle 331422.W"
77 A sheel of parchmenl upon which is drawn a complex 94 A mosaic lile wilh a mullicolored, glazed surface
mechanical conlraplion 95 A pelrified mouse
78 An ornale scabbard lhal fils no blade you have 96 A black pirale flag adorned wilh a dragon's skull
found so far and crossbones
97 A liny mechanical crab or spider lhal moves aboul
when it's not being observed
98 A glass jar conlaining lard wilh a labellhal reads,
"Griffon Grease"
99 A wooden box wilh a ceramic boltom lhal holds a
living worm wilh a head on each end of ils body
100 A melai um conlaining lhe ashes of a hero

PART 1 EQUIPME T 161


CHAPTER 6: CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS

HE COMBINATION Of ABILITY SCORES, RACE, PREREQ_U_IS_I_T_E_S _

class, and background defines your To qualify for a new c1ass, you must meet the ability score
character's capabilities in the game, and prerequisites for both your current c1ass and your new
the personal details you create set your one, as shown in the Multiclassing Prerequisites tabJe.
character apart from every other character. For example, a barbarian who decides to multiclass into
Even within your class and race, you have the druid c1ass must have both Strength and Wisdom
options to fine-tune what your character scores of 13 or higher. Without the full training that
can do. But this chapter is for players who-with the a beginning character receives, you must be a quick
DM's permission-want to go a step further. study in your new c1ass, having a natural aptitude that
This chapter defines two optional sets of rules for is reAected by higher-than-average ability scores.
customizing your character: multiclassing and feats.
Multiclassing lets you combine classes together, MULTlCLASSING PREREQUISITES
and feats are special options you can choose instead
of increasing your ability scores as you gain leveis. Class Ability Score Minimum
Your DM decides whether these options are available Barbarian Strength 13
in a campaign. Bard (harisma 13
Cleric Wisdom 13
MULTICLASSING Druid Wisdom 13
Fighter Strength 13 ar Dexterity 13
Multiclassing allows you to gain leveis in multi pie Monk Dexterity 13 and Wisdom 13
classes. Doing so lets you mix the abilities of those Paladin Strength 13 and (harisma 13
classes to realize a character concept that might not be Ranger Dexterity 13 and Wisdom 13
reAected in one of the standard class options. Rogue Dexterity 13
Sorcerer (harisma 13
With this role, you have the option of gaining a levei Warlock (harisma 13
in a new class whenever you advance in levei, instead Wizard Intelligence 13
of gaining a leveI in your current class. Your leveis in
ali your classes are added together to determine your EXPERIENCE POINTS
character leveI. For example, if you have three leveIs in
wizard and two in fighter, you're a 5th-levei character. The experience point cost to gain a levei is always
based on your total character leve!. as shown in the
As you advance in leveis, you might primarily remain Character Advancement table in chapter 1, not your levei
a member of your original class with just a few leveis in a particular c1ass. So, if you are a c1eric 6jfighter 1,
in another class, or you might change course entire!y, you must gain enough XP to reach 8th levei before you
never looking back at the c1ass you left behind. Vou can take your second levei as a fighter or your seventh
might even start progressing in a third or fourth c1ass. levei as a c1eric.
Compared to a single-c1ass character of the same levei,
you'lI sacrifice some focus in exchange for versatility. HIT POINTS AND HIT DICE

4 • Vou gain the hit points from your new c1ass as described
for leveis after 1st. You gain the 1st-leveI hit points for a
MULTICLASStNG EXAMPLE c1ass only when you are a 1st-levei character.

Gary is playing a 4th-levei fighter. When his character earns Vou add together the Hit Dice granted by ali your
enough experience points to reach Sth levei, Gary decides classes to form your pool of Hit Dice. If the Hit Dice are
that his character will multielass instead of continuing to the same die type, you can simply pool them together.
For example, both the fighter and the paladin have a
progress as a fighter. Gary's fighter has been spending a lot dlO. so ifyou are a palndin 5/fighter 5, you have ten dlO
Hit Dice. Ifyour classes give you Hit Dice of different
of time with Dave's rogue, and has even been doing some types, keep track of them separate!y. If you are a paladin
5jcleric 5, for example, you have five dlO Hit Dice and
jobs on the side for the local thieves' guild as a bruiser. Gary five d8 Hit Dice.

decides that his character will multielass into the rogue e1ass, PROFICIENCY BONUS

and thus his character becomes a 4th.level fighter and lst- Vour proficiency bonus is always based on your total
character levei, as shown in the Character Advancement
levei rogue (written as fighter 4/rogue 1). table in chapter 1, not your levei in a particular class.
For example, ifyou are a fighter 3/rogue 2, YOllhave the
When Gary's character earns enough experience to proficiency bonlls of a 5th-levei character, which is +3.

reach 6th levei, he can decide whether to add another

fighter levei (becoming a fighter S/rogue 1), another rogue

levei (becoming a fighter 4/rogue 2), ar a levei in a third

e1ass, perhaps dabbling in wizardry thanks to the tome of

mysterious lore he acquired (becoming a fighter 4/rogue 1/

wizard 1). ••

••

PART 1 I CUSTo~nZATION OPTIONS


PROFICIENCIES UNARMORED DEFENSE
]f you already have the Unarmored Defense feature, you
When you gain a levei in a class other than your first, can't gain it again from another class.
you gain only some of that class's starting proficiencies,
as shown in the Multiclassing Proficiencies table. SPELLCASTING
Your capacity for spellcasting depends partly on your
MUlTICLASSING PROFICIENCIES combined leveis in ali your spellcasting classes and
partly on your individual leveis in those classes. Once
Class Proficiencies Gained you have the Spellcasting feature from more than one
Barbarian Shields, simple weapons, martial weapons class, use the rules below. If you multiclass but have the
Bard Light armar, one skill ofyour ehoiee, one Spellcasting feature from only one class, you follow the
musical instrument af your choice rules as described in that class.
Clerie Light armar, medium armar, shields
Druid Light armar, medium armar, shields (druids SpeJls Known and Prepared. Vou determine
will not wear armar ar use shields made of what spells you know and can prepare for each class
Fighter metal) individually, as if you were a single.classed member of
Light armar, medium armar, shields, simple that class. ]f you are a ranger 4/wizard 3, for example,
Monk weapons, martial weapons you know three Ist.level ranger spells based on your
Paladin Simple weapons, shortswords leveis in the ranger class. As 3rd-Ievel wizard, you know
Light armar, medium armar, shields, sim pie three wizard cantrips, and your spellbook contains ten
Ranger weapons, martial weapons wizard spells, two of which (the two you gained when
Light armar, medium armar, shields, simple you reached 3rd levei as a wizard) can be 2nd-levei
Rogue weapons, martial weapons, one skill from the spells. Ifyour Intelligence is 16, you can prepare six
elass's skill list wizard spells from your spellbook.
Sorcerer Light armar, one skill from the c1ass's skill list,
Warloek thieves' tools Each spell you know and prepare is associated with one
Wizard of your classes, and you use the spellcasting ability of that
Light armar, simple weapons class when you cast the spell. Similarly, a spellcasting
focus, such as a holy symbol, can be used only for the
CLASS FEATURES spells from the class associated with that focus.

When you gain a new leveI in a class, you get its features SpeJl Slots. Vou determine your available spell slots
for that leveI. A few features, however, have additional by adding together ali your leveIs in the bard, cleric,
rules when you're multiclassing: Channel Divinity, Extra druid, sorcerer, and wizard classes, half your leveis
Attack, Unarmored Defense, and Spellcasting. (raunded down) in the paladin and ranger classes, and
a third of your fighter or rogue leveis (rounded down)
CHANNEL DIVINITY if you have the Eldritch Knight or the Arcane Trickster
Ifyou already have the Channel Divinity feature and gain feature. Use this total to determine your spell slots by
a leveI in a class that also grants the feature, you gain the consulting the Multiclass Spellcaster table.
Channel Divinity effects granted by that class, but getting
the feature again doesn't give you an additional use of Ifyou have more than one spellcasting class, this table
it. You gain additional uses only when you reach a class might give you spell slots of a levei that is higher than
levei that explicitly grants them to you. For example, if the spells you know or can prepare. Vou can use those
you are a cleric 6/paladin 4, you can use Channel Divinity slots, but only to cast your lower.level spells. If a lower-
twice between rests beca use you are high enough levei levei spell that you cast, like burning bands, has an
in the cleric class to have more uses. Whenever you use enhanced effect when cast using a higher.level slot, you
the feature, you can choose any of the Channel Divinity can use the enhanced effect, even though you don't have
effects available to you from your two classes. any spells of that higher leveI.

EXTRA ATTACK For example, if you are the aforementioned ranger 4/
If you gain the Extra Attack class feature from more wizard 3, you count as a 5th-levei character when
than one class, the features don't add together. Vou determining your spell slots: you have four Ist.level
can't make more than two attacks with this feature slots, three 2nd.level slots, and two 3rd.level slots.
unless il says you do (as lhe fighter's version of Extra However, you don't know any 3rd.level spells, nor do you
Attack does). Similarly, the warlock's eldritch invocation know any 2nd-levei ranger spells. Vou can use the spell
Thirsting Blade doesn't give you additional attacks if you slots of those leveis to cast the spells you do know-and
also have Extra Attack. potentially enhance their effects.

Pact Magie. If you have both the Spellcasting class
feature and the Pact Magic class feature from the warlock
class, you can use the spell slots you gain from the Pact
Magic feature to cast spells you know or have prepareu
from classes with the Spellcasting class feature, and you
can use the spell slots you gain fram the Spellcasting
class feature to cast warlock spells you know.

PART I I CUSTOMIZATlON OPTIONS


MULTICLASS SPELLCASTER: Climbing doesn't halve your speed.
Vou can make a running long jump or a running high
SPELL SLOTS PER SPELL LEVEL jump after moving only 5 feet on foot, rather than
10 feet.
LvI. 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
1st 2 ACTOR
2nd 3
3rd 4 2 Skilled at mimicry and dramatics, you gain the
4th 4 3 following benefits:
5th 4 3 2
6th 4 3 3 Increase your Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20.
7th 4 3 3 1 Vou have advantage on Charisma (Deception) and
8th 4 3 3 2 Charisma (Performance) checks when trying to pass
9th 4 3 3 3 1 yourself off as a different person.
10th 4 3 3 3 2 Vou can mimic the speech of another person or the
11th 4 3 3 3 2 1 sounds made by other creatures. Vou must have
12th 4 3 3 3 2 1 heard the person speaking. or heard the creature
13th 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 make the sound, for at least 1 minute. A successful
14th 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 Wisdom (Insight) check contested by your Charisma
15th 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 (Deception) check allows a tistener to determine that
16th 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 the effect is faked.
17th 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
18th 4 3 3 3 3 1 1 CHARGER
19th 4 3 3 3 3 2 1
20th 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 When you use your action to Dash, you can use a
bonus action to make one melee weapon attack or to
FEATS shove a creature.

A feat represents a talent or an area of expertise that gives 1fyou move at least 10 feet in a straight tine
a character special capabilities. lt embodies training, immediately before taking this bonus action, you either
experience, and abitities beyond what a c1ass provides. gain a +5 bonus to the attack's damage roll (if you chose
to make a melee attack and hit) or push the target up
At certain leveIs, your c1ass gives you the Ability Score to 10 feet away from you (if you chose to shove and
Improvement feature. Using the optional feats rule, you you succeed).
can forgo taking that feature to take a feat of your choice
instead. Vou can take each feat only once, unless the CROSSBOW EXPERT
feat's description says otherwise.
Thanks to extensive practice with the crossbow, you
Vou must meet any prerequisite specified in a feat gain the following benefits:
to take that feat. If you ever lose a feat's prerequisite,
you can't use lhat feat until you regain the prerequisite. Vou ignore the loading quality of crossbows with
For example, the Grappler feat requires you to have a which you are proficient.
Strength of 13 or higher. If your Strength is reduced Being within 5 feet of a hostile creature doesn't
below 13 somehow-perhaps by a withering curse- impose disadvantage on your ranged attack rolls.
you can't benefit from the Grappler feat until your When you use the Attack action and attack with a one-
Strength is restored. handed weapon, you can use a bonus action to attack
with a loaded hand crossbow you are holding.
ALERT
DEFENSIVE DUELIST
Always on the lookout for danger, you gain the
following benefits: Prerequisite: Dexterity 13 or higher

Vou gain a +5 bonus to initiative. When you are wielding a finesse weapon with which
Vou can't be surprised while you are conscious. you are proficient and another creature hits you with
Other creatures don't gain advantage on attack rolls a melee attack, you can use your reaction to add your
against you as a result of being hidden from you. proficiency bonus to your AC for that attack, potentially
causing the attack to miss you.
ATHLETE
DUAL WIELDER
Vou have undergone extensive physical training to gain
the following benefits: Vou master fighting with two weapons, gaining the
following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
maximum of 20. Vou gain a +1 bonus to AC while you are wielding a
When you are prone, standing up uses only 5 feet of separate melee weapon in each hand.
Vou can use two-weapon fighting even whcn the one-
you r movement. handed melee weapons you are wielding aren't light.
Vou can draw or stow two one-handed weapons when
you would normally be able to draw or stow only one.

PART I I CUSTOMIZATIO. OPTIO S


DUNGEON DELVER When you roll a Hit Die to regain hit points, the
minimum number of hit points you regain from
Alert to the hidden traps and secret doors found in many the roll equals twice your Constitution modifier
dungeons, you gain the following benefits: (minimum of 2).

Vou have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) and ELEMENTAL ADEPT
Intelligence (Investigation) checks made to detect the
presence of secret doors, Prerequisite: The ability to cast at least one spell
Vou have advantage on saving throws made to avoid
or resist traps. When you gain this feat, choose one of the following
Vou have resistance to the damage dealt by traps. damage types: acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder.
Vou can search for traps while traveling at a normal
pace, instead of only at a slow pace. Spells you cast ignore resistance to damage of the
chosen type. In addition, when you roll damage for a
DURABLE spell you cast that deals damage of that type, you can
treat any I on a damage die as a 2.
Hardy and resilient, you gain the following benefits:
Vou can select this feat multi pIe times. Each time
lncrease your Constitution score by I, to a you do so, you must choose a different damage type.
maximum of 20.

,66 PART I I CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS


GRAPPLER INSPIRING LEADER

Prerequisite: Strength 13 ar higher Prerequisite: Charisma 13 or higher

You've developed the skills necessary to hold your Vou can spend 10 minutes inspiring your companions,
own in close-quarters grappling. Vou gain the shoring up their resolve to fight. When you do so, choose
following benefits: up to six friendly creatures (which can include yourself)
within 30 feet of you who can see or hear you and who
Vou have advantage on attack rolls against a creature can understand you. Each creature can gain temporary
you are grappling. hit points equal to your levei + your Charisma modifier.
Vou can use your action to try to pin a creature grap- A creature can't gain temporary hit points from this feat
pled by you. To do so, make another grapple check. lf again until it has finished a short or long rest.
you succeed, you and the creature are both restrained
until the grapple ends. KEEN MIND
Creatures that are one size larger than you don't auto-
matically succeed on checks to escape your grapple. Vou have a mind that can track time, direction,
and detail with uncanny precision. Vou gain the
GREAT WEAPON MASTER following benefits.

You've learned to put the weight of a weapon to your 1ncrease your lntelligence score by 1, to a rnaximum
advantage, letting its momentum empower your strikes. of20.
Vou gain the following benefits: Vou always know which way is north.
Vou always know the number of hours lef! before the
On your turn, when you score a criticai hit with a next sunrise ar sunset.
mele e weapon or reduce a creature to O hit points Vou can accurately recall anything you have seen or
with one, you can make one melee weapon attack as a heard within the past month.
bonus action.
Before you make a melee attack with a heavy weapon LIGHTLY ARMORED
that you are proficient with, you can choose to take a
-5 penalty to the attack roll. If the attack hits, you add Vou have trained to master the use of light armor,
+10 to the attack's damage. gaining the following benefits:

HEALER Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
Vou are an able physician, allowing you to mend wounds Vou gain proficiency with light armor.
quickly and get your allies back in the fight. Vou gain the
following benefits: LINGUIST

When you use a healer's kit to stabilize a dying crea- Vou have studied languages and codes, gaining the
ture, that creature also regains 1 hit point. following benefits:
As an action. you can spend one use of a healer's kit to
tend to a creature and restore 1d6 + 4 hit points to it, Increase your Intelligence score by 1, to a maximum of 20.
plus additional hit points equal to the creature's Illax- Vou learn three languages of your choice.
illlurn nurnber of Hit Dice. The creature can't regain Vou can ably create written ciphers. Others can't deci-
hit points frolll this feat again until it finishes a short pher acode you create unless you teach them, they
ar long rest. succeed on an Intelligence check (DC equal to your
1ntelligence score + your proficiency bonus), OI' they
HEAVILY ARMORED use magic to decipher it.

Prerequisite: Proliciency with mediuJ1Jarmor LUCKY

Vou have trained to Illaster the use of heavy armor, Vou have inexplicable luck that seems to kick in at just
gaining the following benefits: the right moment.

Increase your Strength score by 1, to a rnaximum of 20. Vou have 3 luck points. Whenever you rnake an attack
• You gain proficiency with heavy armor. roll, an ability check. ar a saving throw, you can spend
one luck point to roll an additional d20. Vou can choose
HEAVY ARMOR MASTER to spend one of your luck points after you roll the die,
but before the outcome is determined. Vou choose which
Prerequisite: Proliciency with heavy armor of the d20s is used for the attack roll, ability check, or
saving throw.
Vou can use your armor to deflect strikes that would kill
others. Vou gain the following benefits: Vou can also spend one luck point when an attack
roll is made against you. RolI a d20, and then choose
Increase your Strength score by 1, to a Illaximum of 20. whether the attack uses the attacker's rull or yours.
While you are wearing heavy armor, bludgeoning.
piercing, and slashing damage that you take from non- If more than one creature spends a luck point to
magical weapons is reduced by 3. influence the outcome of a roll, lhe points cancel each
other oul; no additional dice are rolled.

Vou regain your expended luck points when you
finish a long rest.

PART 1 I CUSTOM IZA I ION OP1IONS


MAGE SLAYER When you use the Dash action, difficult terrain doesn't
cost you extra movement on that turno
Vou have practiced techniques useful in melee combat When you make a melee attack against a creature, you
against spellcasters, gaining the following benefits: don't provoke opportunity attacks from that creature
for the rest of the turn, whether you hit or nol.
When a creature within 5 feet of you casts a spell, you
can use your reaction to make a melee weapon attack MODERATELY ARMORED
against that creature.
When you damage a creature that is concentrating on Prerequisite: Proficiency with Jight armor
a spell, that creature has disadvantage on the saving
throw it makes to maintain its concentration. Vou have trained to master the use of medium armor
Vou have advantage on saving throws against spells and shields, gaining the following benefits:
cast by creatures within 5 feet of you.
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
MAGIC INITIATE maximum of 20.
Vou gain proficiency with medium armor and shields.
Choose a c1ass: bard, c1eric, druid, sorcerer, warlock, or
wizard. Vou learn two cantrips of your choice from that MOUNTED COMBATANT
c1ass's spelllisl.
Vou are a dangerous foe to face while mounted. While
In addition, choose one 1st-levei spell from that same you are mounted and aren't incapacitated, you gain the
lisl. Vou learn that spell and can cast it at its lowest following benefits:
leveI. Once you cast it, you must finish a long rest before
you can cast it again. Vou have advantage on melee attack rolls against any
unmounted creature that is smaller than your mounl.
Your spellcasting ability for these spells depends Vou can force an attack targeted at your mount to tar-
on the c1ass you chose: Charisma for bard, get you instead.
sorcerer, or warlock: Wisdom for c1eric or druid: or Ir your mount is subjected to an effect that allows it to
Intelligence for wizard. make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half dam-
age, it instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the
MARTIAL ADEPT saving throw, and only half damage if it fails.

Vou have martial training that allows you to OBSERVANT
perform special combat maneuvers. Vou gain the
following benefits: Quick to notice details of your environment, you gain
the following benefits:
Vou learn two maneuvers of your choice from among
those available to the Battle Master archetype in the Increase your Intelligence or Wisdom score by 1, to a
fighter c1ass. Ir a maneuver you use requires your tar- maximum of 20.
get to make a saving throw to resist the maneuver's Ir you can see a creature's mouth while it is speaking
effects, the saving throw DC equals 8 + your profi- a Ianguage you understand, you can interpret what it's
ciency bonus + your Strength or Dexterity modifier saying by reading its lips.
(your choice). Vou have a +5 bonus to your passive Wisdom
lfyou already have superiority dice, you gain one (Perception) and passive Intelligence (Investigation)
more: otherwise, you have one superiority die, which scores.
is a d6. This die is used to fuel your maneuvers. A
superiority die is expended when you use il. Vou POLEARM MASTER
regain your expended superiority dice when you
finish a short or long resl. Vou can keep your enemies at bay with reach weapons.
Vou gain the following benetits:
MEDIUM ARMOR MASTER
When you take the Attack action and attack with only
Prerequisite: Proficiency with medium armor a glaive, halberd, or quarterstaff, you can use a bonus
action to make a melee attack with the opposite end of
Vou have practiced moving in medium armor to gain the the weapon. The weapon's damage die for this attack
following benefits: is a d4, and the attack deals bludgeoning damage.
While you are wielding a glaive, halberd, pike, or quar-
Wearing medium armor doesn't impose disadvantage terstaff, other creatures provoke an opportunity attack
on your Dexterity (Stealth) checks. from you when they enter your reach.
When you wear medium armor, you can add 3,
rather than 2, to your AC if you have a Dexterity of RESILIENT
16 or higher.
Choose one ability score. Vou gain the following benefits:
MOBILE
Increase the chosen ability score by 1, to a maximum
Vou are exceptionally speedy and agile. Vou gain the of20.
following benefits: Vou gain proficiency in saving throws using the
chosen ability.
• Your speed increases by 10 feel.

[68 I'ART 1 I CUSTOM[ZAT10N OI'T[ONS


RITUAL CASTER it must have the ritual tag. The proeess of copying the
spell into your ritual book takes 2 hours per levei of the
Prerequisite: Intelligence or Wisdom 13 or higher spell, and eosts 50 gp per leveI. The cost represents
material components you expend as you cxperiment
Vou have learned a number of spells that you can cast as with the spell to master it, as well as the fine inks you
rituais. These spells are written in a ritual book, which need to record it.
you must have in hand while casting one of them.
SAVAGE ATTACKER
When you choose this feat, you aequire a ritual book
holding two 1st-levei spells of your ehoiee. Choose one anee per turn when you roll damage for a melee weapon
of the following classes: bard, c1erie, druid, soreerer, attaek, you ean reroll the weapon's damage diee and use
warlock, or wizard. Vou must choose your spells either total.
from that c1ass's spelllist, and the spells you choose
must have the ritual tag. The c1ass you ehoose also SENTINEL
determines your spelleasting ability for these spells:
Charisma for bard, sorcerer, or warloek; Wisdom for Vou have mastered teehniques to take advantage
c1eric or druid; or Intelligenee for wizard. of every drop in any enemy's guard, gaining the
following benefits:
\f you come aeross a spell in written form, sueh as a
magical speJl seroJl or a wizard's spellbook, you might Whcn you hit a ereature with an opportunity attack,
be able to add lt to your ritual book. The spell must be the creature's speed beeornes O for the rest of
on the spelllist for the c1ass you chose, the spell's leveI the turn.
ean be no higher than half your levei (rounded up), and

PART I CUSTOMIZ n 10 : OP'flO. t Ih


Crealures wilhin 5 feel of you provoke opporlunity When you caSl a spell lhal requires you to make an
atlacks from you even if they lake lhe Disengage attack roll, lhe spell's range is doubled.
action bdore leaving your reach. Vour ranged spell attacks ignore half cover and
When a crealure within 5 feet of you makes an attack lhree-quarters cover.
againsl a larget olheI' lhan you (and lhal largel doesn'l Vou Jearn one canlrip thal requires an attack roll.
have lhis feal), you can use your reaction lo make a Choose lhe canlrip from lhe bard, cJerie, druid, sor-
melee weapon attack against lhe attacking crealure. cerer, warlock, 01' wizard spelllisl. Vour spellcasting
abilily for lhis cantrip depends on lhe spelllist you
SHARPSHOOTER chose from: Charisma for bard, sorcerer, 01' warlock;
Wisdom for cJeric 01' druid; 01' lnlelligence for wizard.
Vou have maslered ranged weapons and can lllake
shols thal olhers lind impossible. Vou gain the TAVERN BRAWLER
following benelits:
Accuslomed to rough-and-lumble lighling using
Attacking ai long range doesn'l impose disadvanlage whalever weapons happen lo be ai hand, you gain lhe
on your ranged weapon attack rolls. following benelils:
Vour ranged weapon attacks ignore half cover and
lhree-quarlers cover. lncrease your Strenglh 01' Constilulion score by I,
Sdore you make an altack wilh a ranged weapon lhal to a maximum of 20.
you are prolicienl wilh, you can choose lo take a -5 Vou are prolicienl wilh improvised weapons and
penally lo lhe attack roll. If the attack hils, you add +10 unarmed slrikes.
to lhe attack's damage. Vour unarmed strike uses a d4 for damage.
When you hil a creature with an unarmed strike 01' an
SHIELD MASTER improvised weapon on your turn, you can use a bonus
action lOattempl to grapple the targel.
Vou use shields notjust for proleclion bul also for
offense. Vou gain lhe following benelils while you are TOUGH
wielding a shield:
Vour hil point maximum increases by an amount equal
If you lake lhe Attack action on your lurn, you can use to lwiee your leveI when you gain lhis feal. Whenever
a bonus aclion to lry to shove a crealure wilhin 5 feel you gain a levei lhereafter, your hit point maximum
of you wilh your shield. increases by an addilional 2 hil poinls.
lf you aren't incapacilated, you can add your shield's AC
bonus lo any Dexlerity saving lhrow you make against WAR CASTER
a spell 01' olheI' harmful effect lhat targets only you.
lf you are subjecled lo an effecl lhal allows you lo Prerequisile: The abilily lo casl aI leasl one spell
make a Dexlerity saving lhruw lo take only half dam-
age, you ean use your reaclion lo lake no dalllage if Vou have pracliced casting spells in the midst of
you succeed on lhe saving lhrow, interposing your combal, learning lechniques lhal grant you the
shield belween yourself and lhe source of lhe effecl. following benelils:

SKILLED Vou have advantage on Conslilulion saving lhrows
lhat you lllake lOmainlain your concenlralion on a
Vou gain proliciency in any combinalion of three skills spell when you lake damage.
01' lools of you r choice. Vou can perform lhe somatie cOlllponenls of spells
even when you have weapons OI'a shield in one OI'
SKULKER bolh hands.
When a hoslile crealure's movement provokes an
Prerequisile: Dexlerily 13 OI' higher opportunily attack from you, you can use your reac-
lion lo casl a spell at lhe creature, ralheI' than making
Vou are expert al slinking lhrough shadows. Vou gain an opporlunity altack. The spellmusl have a casling
lhe following benelils: time of 1 aclion and musl larget only lhal crealure.

Vou can try to hide when you are lighlly obscured WEAPON MASTER
from the creature frum which you are hiding.
When you are hidden from a crealure and miss il with Vou have pracliced extensively with a variely of
a ranged weapon attack, making the attack doesn't weapons, gaining lhe following benelils:
reveal your posilion.
Dilll light docsn'l impose disadvantage on your lncrease your Slrength OI'Dexlerily score by 1, lo a
Wisdom (Perceplion) checks relying on sighl. maxilllum of 20.
Vou gain proliciency wilh four weapons of your choiee.
SPELL SNIPER

Prerequisile: Thc abilily lo casl aI leasl one spell

Vou have learned lechniques to enhance your
attacks wilh cerlain kinds of spells, gaining the
following benelils:

PA RT t I CUSTOlo.11ZATION OPTlONS
'70


PART2
Playing the Garne

PART 2' Pl AYING THE CAME

171


CHAPTER 7: USINGABILITY SCORES

IX ABILlTIES PROVIDE A QUICK DESCRIPTION To determine an ability modifier without consulting

of every creature's physical and mental the table, subtract 10 from the ability score and then

characteristics: divide the total by 2 (round down).

Strength, measuring physical power Because ability modifiers affect almost every attack
. Dexterity, measuring agility roll, ability check, and saving throw, ability modifiers
• Constitution, measuring endurance come up in play more often than their associated scores .

Intelligence, measuring reasoning ADVANTAGE AND
and memory

Wisdom, measuring perception and insight DISADVANTAGE
Charisma, measuring force of personality

Is a character muscle-bound and insightful? Brilliant Sometimes a special ability or spell tells you that you

and charming? Nimble and hardy? Ability scores have advantage or disadvantage on an ability check,

define these qualities-a creature's assets as well a saving throw, or an attack roll. When that happens,

as weaknesses. you roll a second d20 when you make the roll. Use the

The three main rolls of the game-the ability check, higher of the two rolls if you have advantage, and use

the saving throw, and the attack roll-rely on the six the lower roll if you have disadvantage. For example, if

ability scores. The book's introduction describes the you have disadvantage and roll a 17 and a 5, you use the

basic rule behind these rolls: roll a d20, add an ability 5. ]f you instead have advantage and roll those numbers,

modifier derived from one of the six ability scores, and you use the 17.

compare the total to a target number. ]f multi pie situations affect a roll and each one grants

) This chapter focuses on how to use ability checks advantage or imposes disadvantage on it, you don't roll
more than one additional d20. Jf two favorable situations
and saving throws, covering the fundamental activities
grant advantage, for example, you still roll only one
that creatures attempt in the game. Rules for attack rolls
additional d20.
appear in chapter 9.
If circumstances cause a roll to have both advantage

ABILITY SCORES AND and disadvantage, you are considered to have neither of
them, and you roll one d20. This is true even if multi pie

MODIFIERS circumstances impose disadvantage and only one grants
advantage or vice versa. In such a situation, you have
Each of a creature's abilities has a score. a number that neither advantage nor disadvantage.
defines the magnitude of that ability. An ability score
is not just a measure of innate capabilities, but also When you have advantage or disadvantage and
encompasses a creature's training and competence in something in the game, such as the halfling's Lucky
activities related to that ability. trait, lets you reroll the d20, you can reroll only one
of the dice. Vou choose which one. For example, if a
A score of 10 or II is the normal human average, but halfling has advantage on an ability check and rolls
adventurers and many monsters are a cut above average a 1 and a 13, the halfling could use the Lucky trait to
in most abilities. A score of 18 is the highest that a reroll the I.
person usually reaches. Adventurers can have scores
as high as 20, and monsters and divine beings can have Vou usually gain advantage or disadvantage through
scores as high as 30. the use of special abilities, actions, or spells. Inspiration
(see chapter 4) can also give a characler advantage on
Each ability also has a modifier, derived from the checks related to the character's personality, ideais,
score and ranging from -5 (for an ability score of I) to or bonds. The DM can also decide that circumstances
+10 (for a score of 30). The Ability Scores and Modifiers influence a roll in one direction or the other and grant
table notes the ability modifiers for the range of possible advantage or impose disadvantage as a result.
ability scores, from 1 to 30.

ABILITY SCORES ANO MOOIFIERS PROFICIENCY BONUS

Score Modifier Score Modifier Characters have a proficiency bonus determined by
+3 levei, as detailed in chapter I. Monsters also have this
1 -5 16-17 +4 bonus, which is incorporated in their stat blocks. The
2-3 -4 18-19 +5 bonus is used in the rules on ability checks, saving
4-5 -3 20-21 +6 throws, and attack rolls.
6-7 -2 22-23 +7
8-9 -1 24-25 +8 Your proficiency bonus can't be added to a single die
10-11 +0 26-27 +9 roll or other number more than once. For example, if
12-13 +1 28-29 +10 two different rules say you can add your proficiency
14-15 +2 bonus to a Wisdom saving throw, you nevertheless add
30 the bonus only once when you make the savc.

Occasionally, your proficiency bonus might be
multiplied or divided (doubled or halved, for example)

PART 2 USING ABILlTY SCORES


before you apply it. For example, the rogue's Expertise is holding dosed. In situations like these, the outcome
feature doubles the proficiency bonus for certain ability is determined bya special form of ability check,
checks. If a circumstance suggests that your proficiency called a contest.
bonus applies more than once to the same roll, you still
add it only once and multiply or divide it only once. Both participants in a contest make ability checks
appropriate to their efforts. They apply ali appropriate
By the same token, if a feature ar effect allows you bonuses and penalties, but instead of comparing the
to multiply your proficiency bonus when making an total to a DC, they compare the totaIs of their two
ability check that wouldn't normally benefit from your checks. The participant with the higher check total wins
proficiency bonus, you still don't add the bonus to the the contest. That character ar monster either succeeds
check. For that check your proficiency bonus is O, given at the action or prevents the other one from succeeding.
the fact that multiplying O by any number is still O. For
instance, if you lack proficiency in the History skill, If the contest results in a tie, the situation remains the
you gain no benefit from a feature that lets you double same as it was before the contest. Thus, one contestant
your proficiency bonus when you make Intelligence might win the contest by default. If two characters tie in
(History) checks. a contest to snatch a ring off the fioor, neither character
grabs it. In a contest between a monster trying to open
In general, you don't multiply your proficiency bonus a doar and an adventurer trying to keep the doar dosed,
for attack rolls or saving throws. If a feature ar effect a tie means that the door remains shut.
allows you to do so, these same rules apply.

ABILITY CHECKS SKILLS

An ahility check tests a character's ar monster's innate Each ability covers a broad range of capabilities,
talent and training in an effort to overcome a challenge. induding skills that a character or a monster can be
The DM calls for an ability check when a character ar proficient in. A skill represents a specific aspect of an
monster attempts an aclion (other than an attack) that ability score, and an individual's proficiency in a skill
has a chance of failure. When the outcome is uncertain, demonstrates a focus on that aspect. (A character's
the dice determine the results. starting skill proficiencies are determined at character
creation, and a monster's skill proficiencies appear in
For every ability check, the DM decides which of the six the monster's stat block.)
abilities is relevant to the task at hand and the difficulty
of the task, represented bya Difficulty Class. The more For example, a Dexterity check might refiect a
difficult a task, the higher its DC. The Typical Difficulty character's attempt to pull off an acrobatic stunt, to paIm
Classes table shows the most common DCs. an object, or to stay hidden. Each of these aspects of
Dexterity has an associated skill: Acrobatics, Sleight of
TVPICAL DIFFICULTV CLASSES Hand, and Stealth, respectively. So a character who has
Task Difficulty DC proficiency in the Stealth skill is particularly good at
Veryeasy 5 Dexterity checks related to sneaking and hiding.
Easy 10
Medium 15 The skills related to each ability score are shown in
Ha~ 20 the following list. (No skills are related to Constitution.)
Very hard 25 See an ability's description in the later sections of this
Nearly impossible 30 chapter for examples of how to use a skill associated
with an ability.

To make an ability check, roll a d20 and add the Strength Wisdom
relevant ability modifier. As with other d20 rolls, apply Athletics Animal Handling
bonuses and penalties, and compare the total to the De. Insight
If the total equals or exceeds the DC, the ability check Dexterity Medicine
is a success-the creature overcomes the challenge Acrobatics Perception
at hand. Otherwise, it's a failure, which means the Sleight of Hand Survival
character or monster makes no progress toward the Stealth
objective ar makes progress combined with a setback Charisma
determined by the DM. Intelligence Deception
Arcana Intimidation
CONTESTS History Performance
Investigation Persuasion
Sometimes one character's or monster's efforts are Nature
directly apposed to another's. This can accur when both Religion
of them are trying to do the same thing and only one
can succeed, such as attempting to snatch up a magic Sometimes, the DM might ask for an ability check
ring that has fallen on the fioor. This situation also using a specific skill-for example, "Make a Wisdom
applies when ane of them is trying to prevent the other (Perception) check." At other times, a player might ask
one from accomplishing a goal-for example, when a the DM if proficiency in a particular skill applies to a
monster tries to force open a doar that an adventurer check. In either case, proficiency in a skill means an
individual can add his ar her proficiency bonus to ability
checks that involve that skill. Without proficiency in the
skill, the individual makes a normal ability check.

PART 2 I USING ABIUTV SCORES
174


For example, if a characler attempts lo climb up a characler who lacks lhat proficiency can't help anolher
dangerous cliff, lhe Dungeon Masler mighl ask for a characler in lhal task. Moreover, a character can help
Slrenglh (Alhlelics) check. lf lhe characler is proficienl only when two or more individuais working logelher
in Athletics, the characler's proficiency bonus is added would aclually be produclive. Some lasks, such as
to lhe Slrenglh check. lf lhe characler lacks that lbreading a needle. are no easier with help.
proficicncy, he or she JUSlmakes a Slrenglh check.
GROUP CHECKS
VARIANT: SKILLS WITH DIFFERENT ABILITIES When a number of individuais are lrying to accomplish
Normally, your proficiency in a skill applies only lo a somelhing as a group, lhe DM mighl ask for a group
specific kind of abilily check. Proficiency in Alhlelics, abilily check. In such a situalion, lhe characters who are
for example, usually applics lo Slrenglh checks. In some skilled ai a parlicular task help cover those who aren'l.
situations, lhough, your proficiency mighl reasonably
apply lo a differenl kind of check. In such cases, lhe DM To make a group ability check. everyone in lbe group
mighl ask for a check using an unusual combinalion of makes lbe abilily check. lf alleasl half lhe group
abilily and skill, or you mighl ask your DM if you can sllcceeds, the wbole group succeeds. Otherwise,
applya proficiency to a differenl check. For example, lhe group fails.
if you have lo swim from an offshore island to lhe
mainland, your DM mighl call for a Conslilulion check Group checks don't come up very often. and lhey're
lo see if you have the stamina lo make it that faroIn lhis most useful wben ali lhe characlers succeed or
case, your DM mighl allow you to apply your proficiency fail as a group. For example, when advenlurcrs arc
in Alhlelics and ask for a Constilulion (Alhlelics) check. navigating a swamp, lbe DM mighl call for a group
So ifyou're proficienl in Alhlelics, you apply your Wisdom (Survival) check lo see if lhe characlers can
proficiency honus to lhe Conslilulion checkjusl as you avoid lhe quicksand, sinkholcs, and other natural
would normally do for a Slrenglh (Alhlelics) check. hazards of lhe environmenl. If at least half the group
SimilarIy, when your half-orc barbarian uses a display succeeds, lhe successful characlers are ablc to guide
of raw slrenglh to inlimidale an enemy, your DM mighl lhcir companions oul of danger. Olherwise, lhe group
ask for a Strength (Inlimidalion) check, evenlhough slumbles inlo one of lhese hazards.
Intimidalion is normally associaled wilh Charisma.
U SING EACH ABILITY
PASSIVE CHECKS
Every lask lhal a characler or monsler mighl atlempt
A passive check is a special kind of abilily check lhal in the game is covered by one of lhe six abililies. This
doesn'l involve any die rolls. Such a check can represenl seclion explains in more delail wbal lhose abilities
lhe average resull for a task done repealedly, such as mean and the ways lhey are used in lhe game.
searching for secrel doors over and over again. or can
be used when the DM wanls lo secretly determine STRENGTH
whelher lhe characters succeed at something wilholll
rolling dice, such as nOlicing a hidden monsler. Slrenglh measures bodily power, athlelic training, and
the exlenllo which you can exert raw physical force.
Here's how lo delermine a character's lolal for a
passive check: STRENGTH CHECKS
A Slrenglh check can model any atlempllo lifl, p"sh,
10 + ali modifiers thal normally apply to the check pull, or break something, lo force your body lhrougb a
space, or lo otherwise apply brute force lo a silualion.
If the characler has advanlage on lhe check, add 5. For The Alhlelics skill reflecls aptitude in cerlain kinds of
disadvanlage, suhlract 5. The game refers lo a passive Slrength checks.
check lotai as a score.
Athletics. Your Strenglh (Alhlelics) check covers
For example. if a 1st-levei character has a Wisdom of difficult situations YOllencollnler while c1imbing,
15 and proficiency in Perceplion. he or she has a passive jumping. or swimming. Examples include tbe
Wisdom (Perceplion) score of 14. following aclivilies:

The rules on hiding in lhe "Dexlerily" section below You attempt lo climh a sheer or slippery cliff, avoid
rely on passive cbecks, as do lhe exploralion rules hazards while scaling a wall, or cling lo a surface
in chapler 8. while something is lrying to knock you off.
You try lo jump an unuslIally long distance or pull
WORKING TOGETHER off a slunl midjump.
You slruggle lo swim or slay afloal in lreacherous cur-
Some times lwo or more characlers leam up to allempt a renls, slorm-lossed waves, or areas of lhick seaweed.
lask. The characler who's leading lhe effort-or lhe one Or anolher crealure lries lo push or pull you underwa-
wilb lhe highesl abilily modifier-can make an ability ler or olherwise interfere with your swimming.
cbeck wilh advanlage, reflecling the help provided by
the olher characlers. In combal, lhis requires lhe Help Other Strength Checks. The DM mighl also call for
aclion (see chapler 9). a Slrcngtb check when you lry to accomplish tasks like
lhe following:
A character can only provide help if lhe lask is one lhat
he or she cOllld allempt alone. For example, trying lo
open a lock requires proficiency wilh lhieves' lools, so a

PART 2 LJSL G -\BILlIT S i)RE


Force open a stuck, locked, or barred door VARIANT: ENCUMBRANCE
Break free of bonds The rules for lifling and carrying are inlentionally
Push through a tunnel that is too small simple. Here is a variant ifyou are looking for more
Hang on to a wagon while being dragged behind it detailed rules for delermining how a characler is
Tip over a statue hindered by the weighl of equipmen!. When you use this
Keep a boulder from rolling varianl, ignore lhe Strength column of the Armor table
in chapter 5.
ATTACK ROLLS AND DAMAGE
Vou add your Strength modifier to your attack roll and If you carry weight in excess of 5 times your Strength
your damage roll when attacking with a melee weapon score, you are encumbered, which means your speed
such as a mace, a battleaxe, or a javelin. Vou use drops by 10 fee!.
melee weapons to make melee attacks in hand-to-hand
combat, and some of them can be thrown to make a If you carry weighl in excess of 10 times your
ranged attack. Slrenglh score, up to your maximum carrying capacity,
you are instead heavily encumbered, which means your
LIFTING AND CARRYING speed drops by 20 feet and you have disadvanlage on
Vour Strength score determines the amount ofweight ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws that use
you can bear. The following terms define what you can Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution.
lift or carry.
DEXTERITY
Carrying Capacity. Vour carrying capacity is your
Strength score multiplied by 15. This is the weight (in Dexterily measures agility, reflexes, and balance.
pounds) that you can carry, which is high enough that
most characlers don't usually have to worry about it. DEXTERITY CHECKS
A Dexterity check can model any attempt to move
Push, Drag, ar Lirt. Vou can push, drag, or lift a nimbly, quickly, or quietly, or to keep from falling
weighl in pounds up to lwice your carrying capacity on tricky footing. The Acrobatics, Sleight of Hand,
(or 30 times your Slrength score). While pushing or and Stealth skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of
dragging wcight in excess ofyour carrying capacity, Dexterity checks.
your speed drops lo 5 fee!.
Acrobatics. Vour Dexterity (Acrobatics) check covers
Size and Strength. Larger crealures can bear more your attempt to stay on your feet in a tricky situation,
weighl, whereas Tiny creatures can carry less. For such as when you're trying to run across a sheet of ice,
each size calegory above Medium, double lhe creature's balance on a tightrope, or stay upright on a rocking
carrying capacity and lhe amount il can push, drag, or ship's deck. The DM might also call for a Dexterity
lif!. For a Tiny creature, halve lhese weighls. (Acrobatics) check to see if you can perform acrobatic
stunts, including dives, rolls, somersaults, and flips.

PART 2 I USING ABILlTY soaREs
'j6


Sleight af Hand. Whenever you attempt an act of ARMOR CLASS
legerdemain or manual triekery, such as planting Depending on the armor you wear, you might add some
something on someone else or concealing an object on or alI of your Dexterity modifier to your Armor Class,
yaur person, make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. as described in chapter 5.
The DM might also call for a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand)
check to determine whether you can lift a coin purse off INITlATIVE
another person or slip something out of another At the beginning of every combat, you roll initiative
person's pocket. by making a Dexterity check. lnitiative determines
the order of creatures' turos in combat, as described
SteaJth. Make a Dexterity (Stealth) check when you in chapter 9.
attempt to conceal yourself from enemies, slink past
guards, slip away without being notieed, or sneak up on CONSTITUTION
someone without being seen or heard.
Constitution measures health, stamina, and vital force.
Other Dexterity Checks. The DM might call for a
Dexterity check when you try to accomplish tasks like CONSTlTUTlON CHECKS
the following: Constitution checks are uncommon, and no skills apply
to Constitution checks, because the endurance this
Control a heavily Jaden cart on a steep descent ability represents is largely passive rather than involving
Steer a chariot around a tight turo a specific effort on the part of a character or monster.
Pick a lock A Constitution check can model your attempt to push
Disable a trap beyond normallimits, however.
Securely tie up a prisoner
Wriggle free of bonds The DM might call for a Constitution check when you
Playa stringed instrument try to accomplish tasks like the following:
Craft a small or detailed object
Hold your breath
ATTACK ROLLS AND DAMAGE March or labor for hours without rest
Go without sleep
Vou add your Dexterity modifier to your attack roll and Survive without food or water
your damage roll when attacking with a ranged weapon, Quaff an entire stein of ale in one go
such as a sling or a longbow. Vou can also add your
Dexterity modifier to your attack roll and your damage HIT POINTS
roll when attacking with a melee weapon that has the Your Constitution modifier contributes to your hit
finesse property, such as a dagger or a rapier. points. Typieally, you add your Constitution modifier to
each Hit Die you roll for your hit points.
4 ~
Ifyour Constitution modifier changes, your hit point
HIDING maximum changes as well, as though you had the new
modifier from 1st leveI. For example, if Yotl raise your
When you try to hide, make a Dexterity (Stealth) check. Until Constittltion score when you reach 4th levei and your
you are discovered or you stop hiding, that check's total is Constitution modifier increases from +1 to +2, you
contested by the Wisdom (Perception) check of any creature adjust your hit point maximum as though the modifier
that actively searches for signs of your presence. had always been +2. So you add 3 hit points for your
first three leveis, and then roll your hit points for 4th
You can't hide from a creature that can see you. and if you levei using your new modifier. Or if you're 7th levei and
make noise (such as shouting a warning or knocking over a some effect lowers your Constitution score so as to
vase), you give away your position. An invisible creature can't reduce your Constitution modifier by 1, Yotlr hit point
be seen, 50 it can always try to hide. Signs of its passage maximum is reduced by 7.
might still be noticed, however, and it still has to stay quiet.
INTELLIGENCE
In combat, most creatures stay alert for signs of danger
ali around, 50 if you come out of hiding and approach lntelligence measures mental acuity. accuracy of recall,
a creature, it usually sees you. However, under certain and the ability to reason.
circumstances, the Dungeon Master might allow you to stay
hidden as you approach a creature that is distracted, allowing INTELLIGENCE CHECKS
you to gain advantage on an attack before you are seen. An lntelligence check comes into play when you need
to draw on logie, education, memory, or deductive
Passive Pereeptian. When you hide, there's a chance reasoning. The Arcana, History, Investigation, Nature,
someone will notice you even if they aren't searching. To and Religion skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of
determine whether such a creature notices you, the DM lntelligence checks.
compares your Dexterity (Stealth) check with that creature's
passive Wisdom (Perception) score, which equals 10 + the Arcana. Your Intelligence (Arcana) check measures
creature's Wisdom modifier, as well as any other bonuses your ability to recalllore about spells, magie items,
or penalties. Ifthe creature has advantage, add 5. For e1dritch symbols, magical traditions, the planes of
disadvantage, subtract 5. existence, and the inhabitants of those planes.

For example, if a lst.level character (with a proficiency History. Your Intelligence (History) check measures
bonus of +2) has a Wisdom of 15 (a +2 modifier) and your ability to recalllore about historieal events,
proficiency in Perception, he or she has a passive Wisdom
(Perception) of 14. PART 2 I USING AB1LlTY SCORES

What Can You See? One of the main factors in determining
whether you can find a hidden creature or object is how well
you can see in an area, which might be lightly or heavily
obscured, as explained in chapter 8.

~~


legendary people, ancient kingdoms, past disputes, 4 ••
recent wars, and lost civilizations.
FINDING A HIDDEN OB)ECT
Investil1ation. When you look araund for clues and
make deductions based on those clues. you make an When your characler searches for a hidden objecl such as
Intelligence (Investigation) check. Vou might deduce the a secrel doar or a lrap, lhe DM lypically asks you lo make a
location of a hidden object, discern fram the appearance Wisdom (Perceplion) check. Such a check can be used lo find
of a wound what kind of weapon dealt it, or determine hidden delalls or olher informalion and clues lhal you mighl
the weakest point in a tunnelthat could cause itto
collapse. Poring through ancient scralls in search of olherwise overlook.
a hidden fragment of knowledge might also call for an In mosl cases, you need lo describe where you are looking
Intelligence (Investigalion) check.
in order for lhe DM lo delermine your chance of success. For
Nature. Vour Intelligence (Nature) check measures example, a key is hidden benealh a seI of folded clolhes in
your ability to recalllore aboutterrain, plants and lhe lop drawer of a bureau. If you lell lhe DM lhal you pace
animais, the weather. and natural cycles. around lhe room, looking aI lhe walls and fumilure for clues,
you have no chance of finding lhe key, regardless of your
ReJil1ion. Vour Intelligence (Religion) check measures Wisdom (Perceplion) check resull. Vou would have lo specify
your ability to recalllore about deities, rites and prayers, lhal you were opening lhe drawers or searching lhe bureau in
religious hierarchies, holy symbols, and the practices
of secret cults. order lo have any chance of success. ,.

Other InteJlil1ence Checks. The DM might call for an •••
Intelligence check when you try to accomplish tasks like
the following: For example, you mighl try to hear a conversation

Communicate with a creature without using words through a closed door, eavesdrap under an open window,
Estimate the value of a precious item
Pulltogether a disguise to pass as a city guard or hear monslers moving slealthily in the fores!. Or you
Forge a document
Recalllore about a craft or trade might try lo spol lhings that are obscured or easy to
Win a game of skill
miss, whether they are orcs Iying in ambush on a road,
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Wizards use Intelligence as their spellcasting ability, lhugs hiding in lhe shadows of an alley, or candlelight
which helps determine the saving throw DCs of
spells they cas!. under a closed secret door.

WISDOM Survival. The DM might ask you to make a Wisdom

Wisdom reflects how attuned you are to the world (Survival) check to follow tracks, hunt wild game, guide
around you and represents perceptiveness and intuition.
your group through frazen waslelands, identify signs
WISDOM CHECKS
A Wisdom check might reflect an effort to read body that owlbears live nearby, predict the weather, or avoid
language, understand someone's feelings, notice things
aboutthe environment, or care for an injured person. quicksand and olher natural hazards.
The Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Perception,
and Survival skills reflect aptitude in certa in kinds of Other Wisdom Checks. The DM mighl call for a
Wisdom checks.
Wisdom check when you try to accomplish tasks like
Animal HandJinl1. When there is any question
whether you can calm down a domesticated animal, the following:
keep a mount fram getting spooked, or intuit an animal's
intentions, the DM might call for a Wisdom (Animal Gel a gul feeling about what course of action lo follow
Handling) check. Vou also make a Wisdom (Animal Discern whether a seemingly dead or living creature
Handling) check to contrai your mount when you attempt is undead
a risky maneuver.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Insil1ht. Vour Wisdom (Insight) check decides whether Clerics, druids, and rangers use Wisdom as their
you can determine the true intentions of a creature, such spellcasting ability, which helps determine the saving
as when searching out a lie or predicting someone's throw DCs of spells they cas!.
next move. Doing so involves gleaning clues fram body
language, speech habits, and changes in mannerisms. CHARISMA

Medicine. A Wisdom (Medicine) check lets you try to Charisma measures your ability to interact effectively
stabilize a dying companion or diagnose an illness. with others. It includes such factors as confidence
and eloquence, and it can represent a charming or
Perception. Vour Wisdom (Perception) check lets commanding personality.
you spot, hear, or otherwise detect the presence of
something. It measures your general awareness of CHARISMA CHECKS
your surroundings and the keenness ofyour senses. A Charisma check might arise when you lry to influence
or entertain others, when you try to make an impression
PART 2 I USING ABILITY se ORES or tell a convincing lie, or when you are navigating a
tricky social situation. The Deception, Intimidation,
Performance, and Persuasion skills reflect aptitude in
certain kinds of Charisma checks.

Deception. Vour Charisma (Deception) check
determines whether you can convincingly hide the
trulh, eilher verbally or lhrough your actions. This
deception can encompass everything fram misleading
others through ambiguity to telling outright lies. Typical
situations include trying to fast-talk a guard, con a
merchanl, earn money through gambling, pass yourself
off in a disguise, dull someone's suspicions with false
assurances, or maintain a straight face while telling
a blatantlie.


Intimidation. When you attempt to influence someone
through overt threats, hostile actions, and physical
violence, the DM might ask you to make a Charisma
(Intimidation) check. Examples include trying to pry
information out of a prisoner, convincing street thugs
to back down from a confrontation, ar using the edge of
a broken bottle to convince a sneering vizier to
reconsider a decision.

Performance. Your Charisma (Performance) check
determines how well you can delight an audience with
music, dance, acting, storytelling, ar some other form of
entertainment.

Persuasion. When you attempt to influence someone
or a group of people with tact. social graces, ar good
nature, the DM might ask you to make a Charisma
(Persuasion) check. Typically, you use persuasion when
acting in good faith, to foster friendships, make cordial
requests, ar exhibit proper etiquette. Examples of
persuading others include convincing a chamberlain to
let your party see the king, negotiating peace between
warring tribes, ar inspiring a crowd of townsfolk.

Other Charisma Checks. The DM might call for a
Charisma check when you try to accomplish tasks like
the following:

Find the best person to talk to for news, rumors,
and gossip
Blend into a crowd to get the sense of key topics
of conversation

SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Bards, paladins, sorcerers. and warlocks use Charisma
as their spellcasting ability, which helps determine the
saving throw DCs of spells they cast.

SAVING THROWS

A saving throw-also called a save-represents an
attempt to resist a spell, a trap, a poison, a disease, ar
a similar threat. Vou don't normally decide to make a
saving throw; you are forced to make one because your
character ar monster is at risk of harm.

To make a saving throw, roll a d20 and add the
appropriate ability modifier. For example, you use your
Dexterity modifier for a Dexterity saving throw.

A saving throw can be modified by a situational
bonus ar penalty and can be affected byadvantage
and disadvantage, as determined by the DM.

Each class gives proficiency in at least two saving
throws. The wizard, for example, is proficient
in Intelligence saves. As with skill proficiencies,
proficiency in a saving throw lets a character add his
ar her proficiency bonus to saving throws made using
a particular ability score. Some monsters have saving
throw proficiencies as well.

The Difficulty Class for a saving throw is determined
by the effect that causes it. For example, the DC for a
saving throw allowed bya spell is determined by the
caster's spellcasting ability and proficiency bonus.

The result of a successful ar failed saving throw is
also detailed in the effeel that allows the save. Usually,
a successful save means that a creature suffers no
harm, ar reduced harm, from an effect.


CHAPTER 8: ADVENTURING

ELVING INTO THE ANCIENT TOMB or HORRORS. MOVEMENT
slipping through the back alleys of
Waterdeep, hacking a fresh trail through Swimming across a rushing river, sneaking down a
the thick jungles on the Isle of Dread-these dungeon corridor, scaling a treacherous mountain slope-
are the things that DUNGEONS& DRAGONS ali sorts of movement play a key role in D&D adventures.
adventures are made of. Your character in
the game might explore forgotten ruins and The DM can summarize the adventurers' movement
uncharted lands, uncover dark secrets and sinister without calculating exact distances or traveI times: "You
plots, and slay foul monsters. And if ali goes well, your travei through the forest and find the dungeon entrance
character will survive to claim rich rewards before late in the evening of the third day." Even in a dungeon,
embarking on a new adventure. particularlya large dungeon or a cave network, the
This chapter covers the basics of the adventuring life, DM can summarize movement between encounters:
from the mechanics of movement to the complexities of "After killing the guardian at the entrance to the ancient
social interaction. The rules for resting are also in this dwarven stronghold, you consult your map, which leads
chapter, along with a discussion of the activities your you through miJes of echoing corridors to a chasm
character might pursue between adventures. bridged bya narrow stone arch."
Whether adventurers are exploring a dusty dungeon
or the complex relationships of a royal court, the game Sometimes it's important, though, to know how long
follows a natural rhythm, as outlined in the book's it takes to get from one spot to another, whether the
introduction: answer is in days, hours, or minutes. The rules for
determining traveI time depend on two factors: the
I. The DM describes the environmenl. speed and traveI pace of the creatures moving and the
2. The players describe what they want to do. terrain they're moving over.
3. The DM narrates the results of their actions.
SPEED
Typically, the DM uses a map as an outline of the
adventure, tracking the characters' progress as they Every character and monster has a speed, which is
explore dungeon corridors or wilderness regions. the distance in feet that the character or monster
The DM's notes, including a key to thc map, describe can walk in 1 round. This number assumes short
what the adventurers lind as they enter each new area. bursts of energetic movement in the midst of a life-
Sometimes, the passage of time and the adventurers' threatening situation.
actions determine what happens, so the DM might
use a timeline or a flowchart to track their progress The following rules determine how far a character
instead of a map. or monster can move in a minute, an hour, or a day.

TIME TRAVEL PACE

In situations where keeping track of the passage of While traveling, a group of adventurers can move at a
time is important, the DM determines the time a task normal, fast, or slow pace, as shown on the Travei Pace
requires. The DM might use a different time scale table. The table states how far the party can move in a
depending on the context of the situation at hand. In period of time and whether the pace has any effecl. A
a dungeon environment, the adventurers' movement fast pace makes characters less perceptive, while a slow
happens on a scale of minutes. lt takes them about a pace makes it possible to sneak around and to search an
minute to creep down a long hallway, another minute area more carefully (see the "Activity While Traveling"
to check for traps on the door at the end of the hall, and section later in this chapter for more information).
a good ten minutes to search the chamber beyond for
anything interesting or valuable. Forced March. The Travei Pace table assumes that
characters traveI for 8 hours in day. They can push on
In a city or wilderness, a scale of hours is often more beyond that limit, at the risk of exhaustion.
appropriate. Adventurers eager to rcach the lonely tower
at the heart of the forest hurry across those fifteen miles For each additional hour of traveI beyond 8 hours,
in just under four hours' time. the characters cover the distance shown in the Hour
column for their pace, and each character must make
For long journeys, a scale of days works besl. a Constitution saving throw at the end of the hour. The
Following the road from Baldur's Gate to Waterdeep, the DC is 10 + 1 for each hour past 8 hours. On a failed
adventurers spend four uneventful days before a goblin saving throw, a character suffers one leveI of exhaustion
ambush interrupts their journey. (see appendix A).

In combat and other fast-paced situations, the game Mounts and Vehicles. For short spans of time (up
relies on rounds, a 6-second span of time described to an hour), many animaIs move much faster than
in chapter 9. humanoids. A mounted character can ride at a gallop
for about an hour, covering twice the usual distance for
a fast pace. If fresh mounts are available every 8 to 10
miles, characters can cover larger distances at this pace,

but this is very rare except in uensely populated areas.

PAR1 2 I ADVEN1URINC 181


Characters in wagons, carriages, or other land DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check to clear a low obstacle
vehicles choose a pace as normal. Characters in a (no taller than a quarter of the jump's distance), such as
waterborne vessel are limited to the speed of the vessel a hedge or low wall. Otherwise. you hit it.
(see chapter 5), and they don't suffer penalties for a fast
pace or gain benefits from a slow pace, Depending on When you land in difficult terrain. you must succeed
the vessel and the size of the crew, ships might be able on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to land on your
to travei for up to 24 hours per day, feet. Otherwise. you land prone.

Certain speciai mounts, such as a pegasus or griffon, HighJump. When you make a high jump. you leap
or special vehicles, such as a carpet of f!ying, allow you into the air a number of feet equal to 3 + your Strength
to traveI more swiftly, The Dungeon Master's Cuide modifier ifyou move at least 10 feet on foot immediately
contains more information on special methods of traveI. before the jump. When you make a standing high jump,
you can jump only half that distance. Either way, each
TRAVEL PACE foot you clear on the jump costs a foot of movement. In
some circumstances. your DM might allow you to make
Distance Traveled per, , . a Strength (Athletics) check to jump higher than you
normally cano
Pace Minute Hour Day Effect
Fast 400 feet 4 miles 30 miles -5 penalty to Vou can extend your arms half your height above
passive Wisdom yourself during the jump. Thus. you can reach above
Normal 300 feel 3 miles 24 miles (Perception) scores you a distance equal to the height of the jump plus 1Vi
Slow 200 feel 2 miles 18 miles times your height.
Able lo use stealth
ACTIVITY WHILE TRAVELING
DIFFICULT TERRAIN
The traveI speeds given in the Travei Pace table As adventurers travei through a dungeon or the
assume relatively simple terrain: roads, open plains, wilderness, they need to remain alert for danger, and
or clear dungeon corridors. But adventurers often face some characters might perform other tasks to help
dense forests, deep swamps, rubble-filled ruins, steep the group's journey.
mountains, and ice-covered ground-all considered
difficult terrain. MARCHING ORDER
The adventurers should establish a marching order.
Vou move at half speed in difficult terrain-moving A marching order makes it easier to determine which
1 foot in difficult terrain costs 2 feet of speed-so you characters are affected by traps. which ones can spot
can cover only half the normal distance in a minute. hidden enemies, and which ones are the closest to those
an hour, or a day. enemies when a fight breaks out.

SPECIAL TYPES OF MOVEMENT A character might occupy the front rank. one or more
middle ranks. or the back rank. Characters in the front
Movement through dangerous dungeons or wilderness and back ranks need enough room to travei side by
areas often involves more than simply walking. side with others in their rank. When space is toa tight,
Adventurers might have to climb, crawl. swim, or jump the marching order must change, usually by moving
to get where they need to go. characters to a middle rank.

CUMBING, SWIMMING. AND CRAWUNG Fewer Than Three Ranks. If an adventuring party
While climbing or swimming, each foot of movement arranges its marching order with only two ranks, they
costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet in difficult terrain). unless are a front rank and a back rank. If there's only one rank,
a creature has a climbing or swimming speed. At the it's considered a front rank.
DM's option, climbing a slippery vertical surface or
one with few handholds requires a successful Strength STEALTH
(Athletics) check. Similarly, gaining any distance in While traveling at a slow pace. the characters can move
rough water might require a successful Strength stealthily. As long as they're not in the open, they can try
(Athletics) check. to surprise or sneak by other creatures they encounter.
See the rules for hiding in chapter 7.
jUMPING
Your Strength determines how far you can jump. NOTICING THREATS
Use the passive Wisdom (Perception) scores of the
LongJump. When you make a 10ngjump. you cover a characters to determine whether anyone in the group
number of feet up to your Strength score if you move at notices a hidden threat. The DM might decide that a
leasl 10 feet 011fool immedialely before the jump. When threat can be noticed only by characters in a particular
you make a standing long jump, you can leap only half rank. For example, as the characters are exploring a
that distance. Eilher way, each fool you clear on the maze of tunnels. the DM might decide that only those
jump costs a foot of movement. characters in the back rank have a chance to hear or
spot a stealthy creature following the group, while
This rule assumes that the heighl of your jump characters in the front and middle ranks cannot.
doesn't maller. such as a jump across a stream or
chasm. At your DM's option, you must succeed on a While traveling at a fast pace. characters take a -5
penalty to their passive Wisdom (Perception) scores
to notice hidden threats.

PART 2 I ADVENTURINO


4 •

Encountering Creatures. If the DM determines SPLITTING Up THE PARTY
that the adventurers eneounter other ereatures while
they're traveling, it's up to both groups to decide what Sometimes, it makes sense to split an adventuring party,
happens next. Either group might decide to attaek, espeeially if you wanl one or more eharaelers lo seoul ahead.
initiate a eonversation, run away, or wait to see what the You ean form mulliple parties, eaeh moving at a different speed.
other group does. Eaeh group has ils own fronl, middle, and baek ranks.

Surprising Foes. If the adventurers eneounter a lhe drawbaek lo lhis approaeh is lhal lhe party will be splil
hostile ereature or group, the DM determines whether inlo several smaller groups in lhe evenl of an allack. lhe
the adventurers or their foes might be surprised when advanlage is lhal a small group of sleallhy eharaelers moving
eombat erupts. See ehapter 9 for more about surprise. slowly mighl be able lO sneak pasl enemies lhal c1umsier
eharaelers would alerl. A rogue and a monk moving at a slow
OTHER ACTIVITIES paee are mueh harder to deteel when lhey leave lheir dwarf
paladin friend behind.
Charaeters who turn their attention to other tasks as the
group travels are not foeused on watehing for danger. ...-• -------------------- ..•.
These eharaeters don't eontribute their passive Wisdom
(Pereeption) seores to the group's chance of noticing For example, a ereature with a Constitution of 14 ean
hidden threats. However, a eharaeter not watehing for hold its breath for 3 minutes. If it starts suffoeating. it
danger ean do one of the following aetivities instead, or has 2 rounds to reaeh air before it drops to O hit points.
some other aetivity with the DM's permission.
VISION AND LIGHT
Navigate. The eharaeter ean try to prevent the group
from beeoming 10st, making a Wisdom (Survival) eheek The most fundamental tasks of adventuring-noticing
when the DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's Cuide danger, finding hidden objeets, hitting an enemy in
has rules to determine whether the group gets lost.) eombat, and targeting a spell, to name just a few-
rely heavily on a eharaeter's ability to see. Darkness
Drawa Map. The eharaeter ean draw a map and other effeets that obseure vision can prove a
that reeords the group's progress and helps the signifieant hindranee.
eharaeters get baek on eourse if they get 10st. No ability
eheek is required. A given area might be Iightly or heavily obseured. In
a Iightly obscured area, sueh as dim light, patehy fog,
Track. A eharaeter ean follow the traeks of another or moderate foliage, ereatures have disadvantage on
ereature, making a Wisdom (Survival) eheek when the Wisdom (Pereeption) eheeks that rely on sight.
DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's Cuide has rules
for traeking.) A heavi1y obscured area-sueh as darkness, opaque
fog, or dense foliage-bloeks vision entireIy. A ereature
Forage. The eharaeter ean keep an eye out for ready in a heavily obseured area effeetively suffers from the
sourees of food and water, making a Wisdom (Survival) blinded eondition (see appendix A).
eheek when the DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's
Cuide has rules for foraging.) The presenee or absenee of Iight in an environment
ereates three eategories of illumination: bright Iight, dim
THE ENVIRONMENT Iight, and darkness.

By its nature, adventuring involves delving into plaees Bright Iight lets most ereatures see normally. Even
that are dark, dangerous, and full of mysteries to be gloomy days provide bright light, as do torehes, lanterns,
explored. The rules in this seetion eover some of the fires, and other sourees of illumination within a
most important ways in whieh adventurers interaet with specifie radius.
the environment in sueh plaees. The Dungeon Master's
Cuide has rules eovering more unusual situations. Dim Iight, also ealled shadows, ereates a Iightly
obseured area. An area of dim Iight is usually a
FALLING boundary between a souree of bright Iight, sueh as
a toreh, and surrounding darkness. The soft Iight
A fali from a great height is one of the most eommon of twilight and dawn also eounts as dim Iight. A
hazards facing an adventurer. particularly brilliant full moon might bathe the land
in dim Iight.
At the end of a fali, a ereature takes Id6 bludgeoning
damage for every 10 feet it fell, to a maximum of 20d6. Darkness ereates a heavily obseured area. Charaeters
The ereature lands prone, unless it avoids taking face darkness outdoors at night (even most moonlit
damage from the fali. nights). within the confines of an unlit dungeon or a
subterranean vault, or in an area of magieal darkness.
SUFFOCATING
BLlNDSIGHT
A ereature ean hold its breath for a number of minutes
equal to I + its Constitution modifier (minimum A ereature with blindsight ean pereeive its surroundings
of 30 seeonds). without relying on sight, within a specifie radius.
Creatures without eyes, sue h as oozes, and ereatures
When a ereature runs out of breath, it ean survive for with eeholoeation or heightened senses, sueh as bats
a number of rounds equal to its Constitution modifier and true dragons, have this sense.
(minimum I round). At the start of its next turn, it drops
to O hit points and is dying. DARKVISION

Many ereatures in the worlds of O&D, espeeially those
that dwell underground. have darkvision. Within a
specified range, a ereature with darkvision ean see in

PART 2 I ADVEN""l URING


darkness as if the darkness were dim light, so areas cano The DM determines an object's Armor Class and
of darkness are only lightly obscured as far as that hit points, and might decide that certain objects have
creature is concerned. However, the creature can't resistance or immunity to certain kinds of attacks. (lt's
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. hard to cut a rope with a club, for example.) Objects
always fail Strength and Dexterity saving throws, and
TRUESIGHT they are immune to effects that require other saves.
A creature with truesight can, out to a specific range, When an object drops to O hit points, it breaks.
see in normal and magical darkness, see invisible
creatures and objects, automatically detect visual A character can also attempt a Strength check to
illusions and succeed on saving throws against them, break an object. The DM sets the DC for any such check.
and perceives the original form of a shapechanger or
a creature that is transformed by magic. Furthermore, SOCIAL INTERACTION
the creature can see into the Ethereal Plane.
Exploring dungeons, overcoming obstacles, and slaying
FOOD AND WATER monsters are key parts of D&D adventures. No less
important, though, are the social interactions that
Characters who don't eat or drink suffer the effects of adventurers have with other inhabitants of the world.
exhaustion (see appendix A). Exhaustion caused by lack
of food or water can't be removed until the character Interaction takes on many forms. Vou might need
eats and drinks the full required amount. to convince an unscrupulous thief to confess to some
malfeasance, or you might try to fialter a dragon so that
FOOD it will spare your life. The DM assumes the roles of any
A character needs one pound of food per day and can characters who are participating in the interaction that
make food last longer by subsisting on half rations. don't belong to another player at the table. Any such
Eating half a pound of food in a day counts as half a day character is called a nonplayer character (NPC).
without food.
In general terms, an NPC's altitude toward you is
A character can go without food for a number of days described as friendly, indifferent, or hostile. Friendly
equal to 3 + his or her Constitution modifier (minimum NPCs are predisposed to help you, and hostile ones are
I). At the end of each day beyond that limit, a character inclined to get in your way. It's easier to get what you
automatically suffers one levei of exhaustion. want from a friendly NPC, of course.

A normal day of eating resets the count of days Social interactions have two primary aspects:
without food to zero. roleplaying and ability checks.

WATER ROLEPLAYING
A character needs one gallon of water per day, or two
gallons per day if the weather is hot. A character who Roleplaying is, literally, the act of playing out a role.
drinks only half that much water must succeed on a In this case, it'syou as a player determining how your
DC 15 Constitution saving throw or suffer one leveI of character thinks, acts, and talks.
exhaustion at the end of the day. A character with access
to even Icss watcr automatically suffers one levei of Roleplaying is a part of every aspect of the game,
exhaustion at the end of the day. and it comes to the fore during social interactions.
Your character's quirks, mannerisms, and personality
If the character already has one or more leveis of infiuence how interactions resolve.
exhaustion, the character takes two leveis in either case.
There are two styles you can use when roleplaying
INTERACTING WITH OBJECTS your character: the descriptive approach and the active
approach. Most players use a combination of the two
A character's interaction with objects in an environment styles. Use whichever mix of the two works best for YOU.
is often simple to resolve in the game. The player tells
the DM that his or her character is doing something, DESCRIPTIVE ApPROACH TO ROLEPLAYING
such a moving a lever, and the DM describes what, if With this approach, you describe your character's words
anything happens. and actions to the DM and the other players. Drawing on
your mental image of your character, you tell everyone
For example, a character might decide to pull a lever, what your character does and how he or she does it.
which might, in turn, raise a portcullis, cause a room to
fiood with water, or open a secret door in a nearby wall. For instance, Chris plays Tordek the dwarf. Tordek
If the lever is rusted in position, though, a character has a quick tem per and blames the elves of the
might need to force it. In such a situation, the DM might Cloakwood for his family's misfortune. At a tavern. an
call for a Strength check to see whether the character obnoxious elf minstrel sits at Tordek's table and tries to
can wrench the lever into place. The DM sets the DC for strike up a conversation with the dwarf.
any such check based on the difficulty of the task.
Chris says, "Tordek spits on the fioor, growls an
Characters can also damage objects with their insult at the bard, and stomps over to the bar. He sits
weapons and spells. Objects are immune to poison and on a stool and glares at the minstrei before ordering
psychic damage, but otherwise they can be affected another drink."
by physical and magical attacks much like creatures
In this example, Chris has conveyed Tordek's mood
and given the DM a clear idca of his character's
altitude and actions.

PAR r:.: <\DVL Tl;RI NG 185


When using descriptive roleplaying, keep the on your best bonuses and skills. If the group needs to
following things in mind: trick a guard into letting them into a castle, the rogue
who is proficient in Deception is the best bet to lead the
Describe your character's emotions and altitude. discussion. When negotiating for a hostage's release,
Focus on your character's intent and how others the cleric with Persuasion should do most of the talking.
might perceive it.
Provide as much embellishment as you feel RESTING
comfortable with.
Heroic though they might be, adventurers can't spend
Don't worry about getting things exactly right.Just every hour of the day in the thick of exploration, social
focus on thinking about what your character would do interaction, and combato They need rest-time to
and describing what you see in your mind. sleep and eat, tend their wounds, refresh their minds
and spirits for spellcasting, and brace themselves for
ACTIVE ApPROACH TO ROLEPLAYING further adventure.
If descriptive roleplaying teUs your DM and your fellow
players what your character thinks and does, active Adventurers can take short rests in the midst of an
roleplaying shows them. adventuring day and a long rest to end the day.

When you use active roleplaying, you speak with your SHORT REST
character's voice, like an actor taking on a role. Vou might
even echo your character's movements and body language. A short rest is a period of downtime, at least I hour long,
This approach is more immersive than descriptive during which a character does nothing more strenuous
roleplaying, though you still need to describe things than eating, drinking, reading, and tending to wounds.
that can't be reasonably acted out.
A character can spend one or more Hit Dice at the end
Going back to the example of Chris roleplaying Tordek of a short rest, up to the character's maximum number
above, here's how the scene might play out if Chris used of Hit Dice, which is equal to the character's leveI. For
active roleplaying: each Hit Die spent in this way, the player rolls the die
and adds the character's Constitution modifier to it. The
Speaking as Tordek, Chris says in a gruff, deep voice, character regains hit points equal to the total. The player
"I was wondering why it suddenly smelled awful in here. can decide to spend an additional Hit Die after each roll.
If I wanted to hear anything out of you, l'd snap your A character regains some spent Hit Dice upon finishing
arm and enjoy your screams." In his normal voice, Chris a long rest, as explained below.
then adds, "I get up, glare at the elf, and head to the bar."
LONG REST
RESULTS OF ROLEPLAYING
The DM uses your character's actions and attitudes to A long rest is a period of extended downtime, at least 8
determine how an NPC reacts. A cowardly NPC buckles hours long, during which a character sleeps or performs
under threats of violence. A stubborn dwarf refuses to light activity: reading, talking, eating, or standing watch
let anyone badger her. A vain dragon laps up f1attery. for no more than 2 hours. If the rest is interrupted by a
period of strenuous activity-at least 1 hour of walking,
When interacting with an NPC, pay close attention to fighting, casting spells, or similar adventuring activity-
the DM's portrayal of the NPC's mood, dialogue, and the characters must begin the rest again to gain any
personality. Vou might be able to determine an NPC's benefit from it.
personality traits, ideais, f1aws, and bonds, then play on
them to influence the NPC's attitude. At the end of a long rest, a character regains alllost
hit points. The character also regains spent Hit Dice, up
Interactions in 0&0 are much like interactions in to a number of dice equal to half of the character's total
reallife. Ifyou can offer NPCs something they want, number of them. For example, if a character has eight
threaten them with something they fear, or play on their Hit Dice, he or she can regain four spent Hit Dice upon
sympathies and goals, you can use words to get almost finishing a long resto
anything you want. On the other hand, if you insult a
proud warrior or speak ill of a noble's allies, your efforts A character can't benefit from more than one long rest
to convince or deceive will fali short. in a 24-hour period, and a character must have at least
1 hit point at the start of the rest to gain its benefits.
ABILITY CHECKS
BETWEEN AnVENTURES
In addition to roleplaying, ability checks are key in
determining the outcome of an interaction. Between trips to dungeons and battles against ancient
evils, adventurers need time to rest, recuperate, and
Your roleplaying efforts can alter an NPC's altitude, prepare for their next adventure. Many adventurers also
but there might still be an element of chance in the use this time to perform other tasks, such as crafting
situation. For example, your DM can call for a Charisma arms and armor, performing research, or spending
check at any point during an interaction if he or she their hard-earned gold.
wants the dice to play a role in determining an NPC's
reactions. Other checks might be appropriate in certain In some cases, the passage of time is something that
situations, at your DM's discretion. occurs with little fanfare or description. When starting
a new adventure, the DM might simply declare that a
Pay attention to your skill proficiencies when thinking certain amount oftime has passed and allowyou to
of how you want to interact with an NPC, and stack
the deck in your favor by using an approach that relies

186 PART 2 I ADVENTURING


describe in general terms what your character has PRACTICING A PROFESSION
been doing. At other times, the DM might want to keep Vou can work between adventures. allowing you to
track of just how much time is passing as events beyond maintain a modest lifestyle without having to pay 1 gp
your perception stay in motion. per day (see chapter 5 for more information on lifestyle
expenses). This benefit lasts as long you continue to
LIFESTYLE EXPENSES practice your profession.

Between adventures, you choose a particular quality Ir you are a member of an organization that can
of !ife and pay the cost of maintaining that lifestyle, as provide gainful employment, such as a tem pIe or a
described in chapter 5. thieves' guild. you earo enough to support a comfortable
lifestyle instead.
Living a particular lifestyle doesn't have a huge effect
on your character, but your lifestyle can affect the way Ir you have proficiency in the Performance skill and
other individuais and groups react to you. For example, put your performance skill to use during your downtime,
when you lead an aristocratic lifestyle, it might be easier you earn enough to support a wealthy !ifestyle instead.
for you to influence the nobles of the city than if you
live in poverty. RECUPERATING
Vou can use downtime between adventures to recover
DOWNTIME ACTIVITIES from a debilitating injury, disease, or poison.

Between adventures, the DM might ask you what your After three days of downtime spent recuperating,
character is doing during his or her downtime. Periods you can make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw.
of downtime can vary in duration, but each downtime On a successful save, you can choose one of the
activity requires a certain number of days to complete following results:
before you gain any benefit, and at least 8 hours of each
day must be spent on the downtime activity for the day End one effect on you that prevents you from regain-
to count. The days do not need to be consecutive. Ir you ing hit points.
have more than the minimum amount of days to spend, For the next 24 hours, gain advantage on saving
you can keep doing the same thing for a longer period throws against one disease or poison currently
of time, or switch to a new downtime activity. affecting YOU.

Downtime activities other than the ones presented RESEARCHING
below are possible. If you want your character to spend The time between adventures is a great chance to
his or her downtime performing an activity not covered perform research, gaining insight into mysteries
here, discuss it with your DM. that have unfurled over the course of the campaign.
Research can include poring over dusty tomes and
CRAFTING crumbling scrolls in a library or buying drinks for the
Vou can craft nonmagical objects, including adventuring locais to pry rumors and gossip from their lips.
equipment and works of art. Vou must be proficient
with tools related to the object you are trying to create When you begin your research, the DM determines
(typically artisan's tools). Vou might also need aeeess to whether the information is available, how many days of
special materiais or locations necessary to create it. For downtime it will take to find it, and whether there are
example, someone proficient with smith's tools needs a any restrictions on your research (such as needing to
forge in order to craft a sword or suit of armor. seek out a specific individual, tome. or location). The
DM might also require you to make one or more ability
For every day of downtime you spend crafting, you checks. such as an Intelligence (Investigation) check
can craft one or more items with a total market value to find clues pointing toward the information you seek.
not exceeding 5 gp, and you must expend raw materiaIs or a Charisma (Persuasion) check to secure someone's
worth half the total market value. Ir something you aid. Once those conditions are met, you learn the
want to craft has a market value greater than 5 gp, you information if it is available.
make progress every day in 5-gp increments until you
reach the market value of the item. For example, a suit For each day of research. you must spend 1 gp to
of plate armor (market value 1,500 gp) takes 300 days cover your expenses. This cost is in addition to your
to craft by yourself. normallifestyle expenses (as discussed in chapter 5).

Multiple characters can combine their efforts toward TRAINING
the crafting of a single item, provided that the characters Vou can spend time between adventures learning a new
ali have proficiency with the requisite tools and are language or training with a set of tooIs. Your DM might
working together in the same place. Each character allow additional training options.
contributes 5 gp worth of effort for every day spent
helping to craft the item. For example, three characters First, you must find an instructor willing to teach you.
with the requisite to01 proficiency and the proper The DM determines how long it takes. and whether one
facilities can craft a suit of plate armor in 100 days, or more ability checks are required.
at a total cost of 750 gp.
The training lasts for 250 days and eosts 1 gp per day.
While crafting. you can maintain a modest !ifestyle After you spend the requisite amount of time and money,
without having to pay 1 gp per day. or a comfortable you learn the new language or gain proficieney with
lifestyle at half the normal cost (see chapter 5 for more the new tool.
information on lifestyle expenses).
PART 2 I '\OVENTURI. 'G


CHAPTER 9: COMBAT

HE CLATTER OF A SWORD STRIKING AGAINST opposing side. Any character or monster that doesn't
notice a threat is surprised at the start of the encounter.
a shield. The terrible rending sound as
monstrous claws tear through armor. A If you're surprised, you can't move or take an aclion
brilliant flash of light as a ball of f1ame on your first turn of the combat, and you can't take a
blossoms from a wizard's spell. The sharp reaction until that turn ends. A member of a group can
tang of blood in the air, cutting through be surprised even if the other members aren't.
the stench of vile monsters. Roars of fury,
shouts of triumph, cries of pain. Combat in 0&0 can be INITIATIVE
chaotic, deadly, and thrilling.
This chapter provides the rules you need for your Initiative determines the order of turns during combat.
characters and monsters to engage in combat, whether When combat starts, every participant makes a
it is a brief skirmish or an extended conflict in a Dexterity check lOdetermine their place in the initiative
dungeon or on a field of battle. Throughout this chapter, order. The DM makes one roll for an entire group of
the rules address you, the player or Dungeon Master. identical creatures, so each member of the group acts at
The Dungeon Master controls ali the monsters and the same time.
nonplayer characters involved in combat, and each other
player controls an adventurer. "You" can also mean the The DM ranks the combatants in order from the one
character or monster that you control. with the highest Dexterity check total to the one with
the lowest. This is the order (called the initiative order)
THE ORDER OF COMBAT in which they act during each round. The initiative order
remains the same from round to round.
A typical combat encounter is a clash between two
sides, a f1urry of weapon swings, feints, parries, If a tie occurs, the DM decides the order among
footwork, and spellcasting. The game organizes the tied DM-controlled creatures, and the players decide
chaos of combat into a cycle of rounds and turns. A the order among their tied characters. The DM can
round represents about 6 seconds in the game world. decide the order if the tie is between a monster and a
During a round, each participant in a battle takes a player character. Optionally, the DM can have the tied
turno The order of turns is determined at the beginning characters and monsters each roll a d20 to determine
of a combat encounter, when everyone rolls initiative. the order, highest roll going first.
Once everyone has taken a turn, the fight continues to
the next round if neither side has defeated the other. YOUR TURN

SURPRISE On your turn, you can move a distance up to your speed
and take one aetion. Vou decide whether to move first
A band of adventurers sneaks up on a bandit camp, or take your action first. Your speed-sometimes ealled
springing from the trees to attack them. A gelatinous your walking speed-is noted on your eharacter sheet.
cube glides down a dungeon passage, unnoticed by
the adventurers until the cube engulfs one of them. In The most common actions you can take are described
these situations, one side of the battle gains surprise in the "Actions in Combat" section later in this chapter.
over the other. Many class features and other abilities provide
additional options for your action.
The DM determines who might be surprised. If
neither side tries to be stealthy, they automatically notice The "Movement and Position" section later in this
each other. Otherwise, the DM compares the Dexterity chapter gives the ru les for your move.
(Stealth) checks of anyone hiding with the passive
Wisdom (Perception) score of each creature on the Vou can forgo moving, taking an action, or doing
anything at ali on your turn.lfyou can't decide what to
••• •• do on your turn, consider taking the Dodge or Ready
COMBAT STEP BY STEP action, as described in "Actions in Combat."

1.Delermine surprise. The DMdelermines whelher anyone BONUS ACTIONS
involvedin lhe combal encounler is surprised. Various class features, spells, and other abilities let you
take an additional action on your turn called a bonus
2.Eslablishposilions. The DMdecides where ali lhe action. The Cunning Action feature, for example, allows
characlers and monslers are localed. Givenlhe a rogue to take a bonus action. Vou can take a bonus
advenlurers' marching arder ar lheir slaled posilions in action only when a special ability, spell, or other feature
lhe roam ar olher localion, lhe DMfigures oul where lhe of the game states that you can do something as a bonus
adversaries are-how far awayand in whal direclion. action. Vou otherwise don't have a bonus action to take.

3.RolIinilialive.Everyoneinvolvedin lhe combal encounler Vou can take only one bonus action on your turn, so
rolls inilialive,delermining lhe arder of combalanls' lurns. you must choose which bonus action to use when you
have more than one available.
4.Takelurns. Each parlicipanl in lhe ballle lakes a lum in
initiative arder. Vou choose when to take a bonus action during your
turn, unless the bonlls action's timing is specified, and
5.Beginlhe nexl round. When everyoneinvolvedin lhe anything that deprives you ofyour ability to take actions
combal has had a lurn, lhe round ends. Repealslep 4 unlil also prevents you from taking a bonus action.

.r..l-h.e-•fi-gh-lin-g-slo-ps-. --------------~,.- PART 2 I COMBAT


OTHER ACTI V ITY ON YOUR TuRN On your turn, you can move a distance up to your
Your turn can include a variety of f10urishes that require speed. Vou can use as much ar as little of your speed as
neither your action nor your move. you Iike on your turn, following the rules here.

Vou can communicate however you are abIe, through Your movement can includejumping, c1imbing, and
brief utterances and gestures, as you take your turno swimming. These different modes of movement can
be combined with walking, ar they can constitute your
Vou can also interact with one object ar feature of the entire move. However you're moving, you deduct the
enviranment for free, during either your move ar your distance of each part of your move fram your speed until
action. For example. you could open a doar during your it is used up ar until you are dane moving.
move as you stride toward a foe, ar you could draw your
weapon as part of the same action you use to attack. The "Special Types of Movement" section in
chapter 8 gives the particulars for jumping, c1imbing,
If you want to interact with a second object, you need and swimming.
to use your action. Some magic items and other special
objects always require an action to use, as stated BREAKING Dp YOUR MOVE
in their descriptions.
Vou can break up your movement on your turn, using
The DM might require you to use an action for any some of your speed before and after your action. For
of these activities when it needs special care ar when it example, if you have a speed of 30 feet, you can move
presents an unusual obstacle. For instance, the DM 10 feet, take your action, and then move 20 feel.
could reasonably expect you to use an action to open a
stuck doar ar turn a crank to lower a drawbridge. MOVING BETWEEN ATTACKS
If you take an action that includes more than one
REACTIONS weapon attack, you can break up your movement even
further by moving between those attacks. For example,
Certain special abilities, spells, and situations allow a fighter who can make two attacks with the Extra
you to take a special action called a reaction. A reaction Attack feature and who has a speed of 25 feet could
is an instant response to a trigger of some kind, which move 10 feet, make an attack, move 15 feet, and then
can occur on your turn ar on someone else's. The attack again.
opportunity attack, described later in this chapter, is the
most common type of reaction. USING DIFFERENT SPEEDS
If you have more than one speed, such as your walking
When you take a reaction, you can't take another one speed and a f1yingspeed, you can switch back and forth
until the start of your next turno If the reaction interrupts between your speeds during your move. Whenever you
another creature's turn, that creature can continue its switch, subtract the distance you've already moved fram
turn right after the reaction. the new speed. The result determines how much farther
you can move. If the result is O ar less. you can't use the
MOVEMENT AND POSITION new speed during the current move.

In combato characters and monsters are in constant For example, if you have a speed of 30 and a flying
motion, often using movement and position to gain speed of 60 beca use a wizard cast the fly spell on you,
the upper hand. you could fly 20 feet, then walk 10 feet, and then leap
into the air to fly 30 feet more.
••• ••
INTERACTlNG WITH OBIECTS AROUND Vou DIFFICULT TERRAIN

Here are a few examples of the sorts of thing you can do in Combat rarely takes place in bare rooms or on
tandem with your movement and action: featureless plains. Boulder-strewn caverns, briar-
choked forests, treacherous staircases-the setting of
draw or sheathe a sword ,. a typical fight contains difficult terrain.
open or close a door
withdrawa potion fram your backpack Every foot of movement in difficult terrain costs 1
pick up a dropped axe extra fool. This ruIe is true even if multiple things in
take a bauble from a table a space count as difficult terrain.
remove a ring fram your finger
stuff some food into your mouth Low furniture, rubble, undergrawth, steep stairs,
plant a banner in the ground snow, and shallow bogs are examples of difficult terrain.
fish a few coins from your belt pouch The space of another creature, whether hostile or not,
drink ali the ale in a lIagon also counts as difficult terrain.
throwa lever or a switch
pull a torch fram a sconce BEING PRONE
take a book from a shelf you can reach
extinguish a small liame Combatants often find themselves Iying on the ground,
either because they are knocked down ar because they
don a mask thraw themselves down. In the game, they are prane,
pull the hood of your c10ak up and over your head a condition described in appendix A.
put your ear to a door
kick a small stone Vou can drop prone without using any of your
tum a key in a lock speed. Standing up takes more effort; doing so costs
tap the lIoor with a 10.foot pole
hand an item to another character

••

19° PART 2 I COMBAT


an amount of movement equal to half your speed. For •.•
example, if your speed is 30 feet, you must spend 15 feet
of movement to stand up. Vou can't stand up if you don't
have enough movement left or if your speed is O.

To move while prone, you must crawl or use magic
such as teleportation. Every foot of movement while
crawling costs 1 extra fool. Crawling 1 foot in difficult
terrain, therefore, costs 3 feet of movement.

MOVING AROUND OTHER

CREATURES

Vou can move through a nonhostile creature's space.
In contrast, you can move through a hostile creature's
space only if the creature is at least two sizes larger or
smaller than you. Remember that another creature's
space is difficult terrain for you.

Whether a creature is a friend or an enemy, you can't
willingly end your move in its space.

lfyou leave a hostil e creature's reach during your
move, you provoke an opportunity attack, as explained
later in the chapter.

FLYING MOVEMENT

Flying creatures enjoy many benetits of mobility, but
they must also deal with the danger of falling. lf a flying

creature is knocked prone, has its speed reduced to à, or

is otherwise deprived of the ability to move, the creature
falls, unless it has the ability to hover or it is being held
aloft by magic, such as by the fly spell.

CREATURE SIZE

Each creature takes up a different amount of space.
The Size Categories table shows how much space
a creature of a particular size controls in combal.
Objects sometimes use the same size categories.

SIZE CATEGORIES

Size Space
Tiny 2'/2 by 2'1, fI.
Small 5 by Sfl.
Medium SbySft.
Large 10 by 10 ft.
Huge lSbylSft.
Gargantuan 20 by 20 ft. or larger

SPACE

A creature's space is the area in feet that it effectively
controls in combat, not an expression of its physical
dimensions. A typical Medium creature isn't 5 feet
wide, for example, but it does control a space that
wide. lf a Medium hobgoblin stands in a 5-foot-wide
doorway, other creatures can't get through unless the
hobgoblin lets them.

A creature's space also reflects the area it needs to
tight effeetively. For that reason, there's a limit to lhe
number of ereatures that can surround another creature
in combal. Assuming Medium combatants, eight
creatures can tit in a 5-foot radius around another one.

Because larger creatures take up more space, fewer
of them can surround a creature. If tive Large creatures


4 •

VARIANT: PLAYING ON A CRIO CAST A SPELL

If you play oul a combat using a square grid and minialures Spellcasters such as wizards and clerics, as well as
ar olher lokens, follow lhese rules. many monsters, have access to spells and can use
them to great effect in combal. Each spell has a casting
Squares. Each square on lhe grid represents 5 feel. time, which specilies whether the caster must use an
Speed. Ralher lhan moving fool by fool, move square by action, a reaction, minutes, or even hours to cast the
square on lhe grid. This means you use your speed in 5.foot spell. Casting a spell is, therefore, not necessarily an
segments. This is particularly easy if you lranslate your speed action. Most spells do have a casting time of 1 action,
inlo squares by dividing the speed by 5. For example, a speed so a spellcaster often uses his or her action in combat
of 30 feel lranslales inlo a speed of 6 squares. to cast such a spell. See chapter 10 for the rules
If you use a grid often, consider wriling your speed in on spellcasting.
squares on your characler sheel.
Enlering a Square. To enler a square, you musl have DASH
ai leasl 1 square of movement left, even if lhe square is
diagonally adjacenl lo lhe square you're in. (The rule for When you take the Dash action, you gain extra
diagonal movemenl sacrifices realism for lhe sake of smoolh movement for the current turn. The increase equals
play. The Dungeon Mas!er's Cuide provides guidance on using your speed, after applying any modiliers. With a speed
a more realislic approach.) of 30 feet, for example, you can move up to 60 feet on your
If a square cosls exlra movemenl, as a square of diflicult turn if you dash.
lerrain does, you musl have enough movemenl lefl lo pay for
enlering it. For example, you musl have ai leasl 2 squares of Any increase or decrease to your speed changes this
movemenl lefl lo enler a square of diflicull lerrain. additional movement by the same amounl. lf your speed
Corners. Diagonal movemenl can'l cross lhe comer of a of 30 feet is reduced to 15 feet, for instance, you can
wall, large lree, ar olher lerrain fealure lhal fills its space. move up to 30 feel this turn if you dash.
Ranges. To delermine the range on a grid belween two
lhings-whelher crealures ar objecls-start counling squares DISENGAGE
from a square adjacent lo one of lhem and slop counling in
lhe space of the olher one. Counl by lhe shortesl raule. lfyou take the Disengage action, your movement doesn't
provoke opportunity attacks for the rest of the turn.
~~
DODGE
crowd around a Medium or smaller one, there's little
room for anyone else. In contrast, as many as twenty When you take the Dodge action, you focus entirely on
Medium creatures can surround a Gargantuan one. avoiding attacks. Until the start of your next turn, any
attack roll made againsl you has disadvantage if you
SQUEEZING INTO A SMALLER SPACE can see the attacker, and you make Dexterity saving
throws with advantage. Vou lose this benelit if you are
A crealure can squeeze lhrough a space that is large incapacitated (as explained in appendix A) or if your
enough for a creature one size smaller than il. Thus, a speed drops to O.
Large creature can squeeze through a passage that's
only 5 feet wide. While squeezing through a space, HELP
a creature must spend 1 extra foot for every foot it
moves there, and it has disadvantage on attack rolls Vou can lend your aid to another creature in the
and Dexlerily saving throws. Attack rolls against the completion of a task. When you take the Help action,
creature have advantage while it's in the smaller space. the creature you aid gains advantage on the next ability
check it makes to perform the task you are helping with,
ACTIONS IN COMBAT provided that it makes the check before the start of
your next turno
When you take your action on your turn, you can take
one of the actions presented here, an action you gained Alternatively, you can aid a friendly creature in
from your class or a special feature, or an action that attacking a creature within 5 feet of you. Vou feint,
you improvise. Many monsters have action options of distract the target, or in some other way team up to
their own in their stat blocks. make your ally's attack more effective. lf your ally
attacks the target before your next turn, the Iirst attack
When you describe an action not detailed elsewhere roll is made with advantage.
in the roles, the DM tells you whether that action is
possible and what kind of roll you need to make, if any, HIDE
to determine success or failure.
When you take the Hide action, you make a Dexterity
ATTACK (Stealth) check in an attempt to hide, following the rules
in chapter 7 for hiding. lfyou succeed, you gain certain
The most common action to take in combat is the Attack benelits, as described in the "Unseen Attackers and
action, whether you are swinging a sword, Iiring an Targets" section later in this chapter.
arrow fram a bow, or brawling with your fists.

With this action, you make one melee or ranged
attack. See the "Making an Attack" section for the rules
that govern attacks.

Certa in features, such as the Extra Attack feature
of the Iighter, allow you to make more than one attack
with this action.

IPART 2 COMBAT


4,

IMPROVISING AN ACTION

Your character can do things not covered by the actions in
this chapter, such as breaking down doors, intimidating
enemies, sensing weaknesses in magical defenses, or calling
for a parley with a foe. The only limits to the actions you can
attempt are your imagination and your character's ability
scores. See the descriptions of the ability scores in chapter 7
for inspiration as you improvise.

When you describe an action not detailed elsewhere in r
the rules, the DM tells you whether that action is possible
and what kind of roll you need to make, if any, to determine
success ar failure.

~

READY

Sometimes you want to get the jump on a foe or wait for
a particular circumstance before you act. To do so, you
can take lhe Ready action on your turn so that you can
act later in the round using your reaction.

First, you decide what perceivable circumstance
will trigger your reaction. Then, you choose lhe action
you will take in response to that trigger, or you choose
to move up to your speed in response to it. Examples
include "lf lhe cultist steps on the trapdoor, 1'11pull the
lever that opens it," and "If the goblin steps next to me,
I move away."

When the lrigger occurs, you can either take your
reaction right after the trigger finishes or ignore
the trigger. Remember that you can take only one
reaction per round.

When you ready a spell, you cast it as normal but
hold its energy, which you release with your reaction
when the trigger occurs. To be readied, a spell must'
have a casting time of 1 action, and holding onto the
spell's magic requires concenlration (explained in
chapter 10). If your concentration is broken, the spell
dissipates without taking effect. For example, if you are
concentrating on the web spell and ready magic missiJe,
your web spell ends, and if you take damage before
you release magie missiJe with your reaction, your
concentration might be broken.

SEARCH

When you take the Search action, you devote your
attention to finding something. Depending on the
nature of your search, the DM might have you make
a Wisdom (Perception) check or an lntelligence
(Investigation) check.

USE AN OBJECT

Vou normally interact with an object while doing
something else, such as when you draw a sword as part
of an attack. When an object requires your action for
its use, you take the Use an Object action. This action
is also useful when you want to interact with more than
one object on your turno

MAKING AN ATTACK

Whether you're striking with a melee weapon, firing a
weapon aI range, or making an attack roll as part of a
spell, an attack has a simple structure.


1. Choose a target. Pick a target within your attack's
range: a creature, an object, ar a location.

2. Determine modifiers. The DM determines whether
the target has cover and whether you have advantage
ar disadvantage against the target. In addition, spel1s,
special abilities. and other effects can apply penalties
ar bonuses to your attack rol1.

3. Resolve the attack. Vou make the attack roll. On a
hit, you rol1damage, unless the particular attack has
rules that specify otherwise. Some attacks cause
special effects in addition to ar instead of damage.

If there's ever any question whether something you're
doing counts as an attack, the rule is simple: if you're
making an attack rol1,you're making an attack.

ATTACK ROLLS

When you make an attack, your attack roll determines
whether the attack hits ar misses. To make an attack
rol1,rol1a d20 and add the appropriate modifiers. lf the
total of the roll plus modifiers equals ar exceeds the
target's Armar Class (AC),the attack hits. The AC of a
character is determined at character creation. whereas
the AC of a monster is in its stat block.

MODIFIERS TO THE ROLL
When a character makes an attack rol1,the two most
common modifiers to the rol1are an ability modifier
and the character's proficiency bonus. When a monster
makes an attack roll, it uses whatever modifier is
provided in its stat block.

Ability Modifier. The ability modifier used for a melee
weapon attack is Strength, and the ability modifier used
for a ranged weapon attack is Dexterity. Weapons that
have the finesse ar thrown property break this rule.

Some spel1s also require an attack roll. The ability
modifier used for a spel1 attack depends on the
spellcasting ability of the spel1caster, as explained
in chapter 10.

Proficiency Bonus. Vou add your proficiency bonus
to your attack rol1when you attack using a weapon with
which you have proficiency, as well as when you attack
with a spell.

ROLLING I OR 20

Sometimes fate blesses ar curses a combatant, causing
the novice to hit and the veteran to miss.

If the d20 rol1for an attack is a 20, the attack hits
regardless of any modifiers ar the target's AC. In
addition, the attack is a criticai hit, as explained later
in this chapter.

If the d20 roll for an attack is a I, the attack misses
regardless of any modifiers ar the target's AC.

UNSEEN ATTACKERS AND TARGETS

Combatants often try to escape their foes' notice
by hiding, casting the invisibility spel1, ar lurking
in darkness.

When you attack a target that you can't see, you have
disadvantage on the attack roll. This is true whether
you're guessing the target's location ar you're targeting
a creature you can hear but not see. If the target isn't in


the location you targeted, you automatically miss, but 4,
the DM typically just says that the attack missed, not
whether you guessed the target's location correctly. CONTESTS IN COMBAT

When a creature can't see you, you have advantage on Sattle often involves pítting your prowess against that of
attack rolls against il. your foe. Such a challenge is represented by a contes!. This
section includes the most common contests that require an
lf you are hidden-both unseen and unheard-when actíon in combat: grappling and shoving a creature. The DM
you make an attack, you give away your location when can use these contests as models for improvising others.
the attack hits or misses.
~~
RANGED ATTACKS
creature. The atlack interrupts the provoking creature's
When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow or a movement, occurring right before the creature
crossbow, huri a handaxe, or otherwise send projectiles leaves your reach.
to strike a foe at a distance. A monster might shoot
spines from its taii. Many spells also involve making a Vou can avoid provoking an opportunity attack by
ranged atlack. taking the Disengage action. Vou also don't provoke an
opportunity attack when you teleport or when someone
RANGE or something moves you without using your movement,
Vou can make ranged attacks only against targets within action, or reaction. For example, you don't provoke an
a specified range. opportunity atlack if an explosion huris you out of a foe's
reach or if gravity causes you to fall past an enemy.
If a ranged attack, such as one made with a spell, has a
single range, you can't attack a target beyond this range. TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING
When you take the Attack action and attack with a light
Some ranged attacks, such as those made with a melee weapon that you're holding in one hand, you can
longbow or a shortbow, have two ranges. The smaller use a bonus action to atlack with a different light melee
number is the normal range, and the larger number is weapon that you're holding in the other hand. Vou don't
the long range. Your attack roll has disadvantage when add your ability modifier to the damage of the bonus
your target is beyond normal range, and you can't attack atlack, unless that modifier is negative.
a target beyond the long range.
If either weapon has the thrown property, you
RANGED ATTACKS IN CLOSE COMBAT can throw the weapon, instead of making a melee
Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe atlack with il.
is next to you. When you make a ranged atlack with
a weapon, a spell, or some other means, you have GRAPPLING
disadvantage on the attack roll if you are within 5 feet When you want to grab a creature or wrestle with it,
of a hostil e creature who can see you and who isn't you can use the Attack action to make a special melee
incapacitated. attack, a grapple. If you're able to make multiple attacks
with the Atlack action, this atlack replaces one of them.
MELEE ATTACKS
The target of your grapple must be no more than one
Used in hand-to-hand combat, a meIee atlack allows size larger than you, and it must be within your reach.
you to attack a foe within your reach. A melee attack Using at least one free hand, you try to seize the target
typically uses a handheld weapon such as a sword, by making a grapple check, a Strength (Athletics)
a warhammer, or an axe. A typical monster makes a check contested by the target's Strength (Athletics) or
melee attack when it strikes with its daws, horns, teeth, Dexterity (Acrobatics) check (the target chooses the
tentades, or other body parI. A few spells also involve ability to use). If you succeed, you subject the target to
making a mele e atlack. the grappled condition (see appendix A). The condition
specifies the things that end it, and you can release the
Most creatures have a 5-foot reach and can thus target whenever you like (no action required).
attack targets within 5 feet of them when making a
melee attack. Certain creatures (typically those larger Escaping a Grapple. A grappled creature can use its
than Medium) have melee attacks with a greater reach action to escape. To do so, it must succeed on a Strength
than 5 feet, as noted in their descriptions. (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check contested by
your Strength (Athletics) check.
When you are unarmed, you can fight in melee by
making an unarmed strike, as shown in the weapon Moving a Grappled Creature. When you move, you
table in chapter 5. can drag or carry the grappled creature with you, but
your speed is halved, unless the creature is two or more
OPPORTUNITY ATTACKS sizes smaller than you.
In a fight, everyone is constantly watching for enemies
to drop their guardo Vou can rarely move heedlessly past SHOVING A CREATURE
your foes without putting yourself in danger; doing so Using the Attack action, you can make a special melee
provokes an opportunity attack. atlack to shove a creature, either to knock it prone or
push it away from you. Ifyou're able to make multiple
Vou can make an opportunity attack when a hostile atlacks with the Attack action, this atlack replaces
creature that you can see moves out of your reach. To one ofthem.
make the opportunity attack, you use your reaction
to make one melee atlack against the provoking The target of your shove must bc no more than one
size larger than you, and it must be within your reach.
Vou make a Strength (Athletics) check contested by the 195
target's Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics)

PART 2 1 COMBA r


check (the target chooses the ability to use). If you win When attacking with a weapon. you add your ability
the contest, you either knock the target prone or push modifier-the same modifier used for the attack roll-
it 5 feet away from you. to the damage. A spell tells you which dice to roll for
damage and whether to add any modifiers.
COVER
If a spell ar other effect deals damage to more than
Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can provide one target at the same time, roll the damage once for
cover during combat, making a target more difficult ali of them. For example, when a wizard casts firebaJl or
to harm. A target can benetit from cover only when an a cleric casts liame strike, the spell's damage is rolled
attack or other effect originates on the opposite side once for ali creatures caught in the blast.
of the cover.
CRITICAL HITS
There are three degrees of cover. If a target is behind When you score a criticai hit, you get to roll extra dice
multi pIe sources of cover, only the most protective for the attack's damage against the target. RolI ali of the
degree of cover applies; the degrees aren't added attack's damage dice twice and add them together. Then
together. For example, if a target is behind a creature add any relevant modifiers as normal. To speed up play.
that gives half cover and a tree trunk that gives three- you can roll ali the damage dice alonce.
quarters cover, the target has three-quarters cover.
For example, if you score a criticai hit with a dagger,
A target with half cover has a +2 bonus to AC and roll 2d4 for the damage, rather than Id4, and then add
Oexterity saving throws. A target has half cover if an your relevant ability modifier. If the attack involves other
obstacle blocks at least half of its body. The obstacle damage dice, such as from the rogue's Sneak Attack
might be a low wall. a large piece of furniture, a narrow feature, you roll those dice twice as well.
tree trunk, or a creature, whether that creature is an
enemy or a friend. DAMAGE TYPES
Oifferent attacks. damaging spells, and other harmful
A target with three-quarters cover has a +5 bonus effects deal different types of damage. Oamage types
to AC and Oexterity saving throws. A target has three- have no rules of their own, but other rules, such as
quarters cover if about three-quarters of it is covered damage resistance, rely on the types.
by an obstacle. The obstacle might be a portcullis. an
arrow slit, or a thick tree trunk. The damage types follow, with examples to help a
DM assign a damage type to a new effect.
A target with total cover can't be targeted directly
by an attack or a spell, although some spells can reach Acid. The corrosive spray of a black dragon's breath
such a target by including it in an area of effect. A and the dissolving enzymes secreted by a black pudding
target has total cover if it is completely concealed by deal acid damage.
an obstacle.
Bludgeoning. Slunt force attacks-hammers. falling,
DAMAGE AND HEALING constriction. and the like-deal bludgeoning damage.

Injury and the risk of death are constant companions Cold. The infernal chill radiating from an ice devil's
of those who explore the worlds of 0&0. The thrust of spear and the frigid blast of a white dragon's breath
a sword. a well-placed arrow, or a blast of f1ame from a deal cold damage.
firebaJl spell ali have the potential to damage. or even
kill. the hardiest of creatures. Fire. Red dragons breathe fire, and many spells
conjure f1ames to deal fire damage,
HIT POINTS
Force. Force is pure magical energy focused into a
Hit points represent a combination of physical and damaging formo Most effects that deal force damage are
mental durability. the will to live, and luck. Creatures spells, including magic missile and spirituaJ weapon.
with more hit points are more difficult to kill. Those
with fewer hit points are more fragile. Lightning. A Jightning bolt spell and a blue dragon's
breath deallightning damage.
A creature's current hit points (usually just called hit
points) can be any number from the creature's hit point Necrotic. Necrotic damage. dealt by certain undead
maximum down to O. This number changes frequently and a spell such as chilJ touch. withers matter and
as a creature takes damage ar receives healing. even the soul.

Whenever a creature takes damage, that damage is Piercing. Puncturing and impaling attacks, including
subtracted from its hit points. The loss of hit points has spears and monsters' bites, deal piercing damage.
no effect on a creature's capabilities until the creature
drops to O hit points. Poison. Venomous stings and the toxic gas of a green
dragon's breath deal poison damage.
DAMAGE ROLLS
Psychic. Mental abilities such as a mind f1ayer's
Each weapon. spell. and harmful monster ability psionic blast deal psychic damage.
specifies the damage it deals. Vou roll the damage die
or dice, add any modifiers, and apply the damage to Radiant. Radiant damage. dealt bya cleric's liame
your target. Magic weapons, special abilities, and other strike spell or an angel's smiting weapon, sears the f1esh
factors can grant a bonus to damage. Iike fire and overloads the spirit with powcr.

PART 2 I COMBAT Slashing. Swords. axes. and monsters' claws deal
slashing damage.

Thunder. A concussive burst of sound. such as the
effect of lhe thunderwave spell, deals lhunder damage.


"'" •••
DESCRIBING THE EFFECTS OF DAMAGE
DAMAGE RESISTANCE AND
Dungeon Masters deseribe hit pointloss in different ways.
VULNERABILITY
When your eurrent hit pointtotal is half or more of your hit
Some creatures and objects are exceedingly difficult or
unusually easy to hurt with certain types of damage. point maximum. you lypieally show no signs of injury. When

lf a creature or an object has resistance to a damage you drop below half your hit point maximum, you show signs
type, damage of that type is halved against it. If a
creature or an object has vulnerability to a damage of wear, sueh as euts and bruises. An attaek that reduees you
type, damage of that type is doubled against it.
to O hit points strikes you direetly, leaving a bleeding injury or
Resistance and then vulnerability are applied after
ali other modifiers to damage. For example, a creature other trauma, or it simply knoeks you uneonseious. ~
has resistance to bludgeoning damage and is hit byan
altack that deals 25 bludgeoning damage. The creature ~
is also within a magical aura that reduces ali damage by
5. The 25 damage is first reduced by 5 and then halved, DEATH SAVING THROWS
so the creature takes 10 damage.
Whenever you start your tum with O hit points, you
Multiple instances of resistance or vulnerability that must make a special saving throw, called a death saving
affect the same damage type count as only one instance. throw, to determine whether you creep closer to death
For example, if a creature has resistance to fire damage or hang onto life. Unlike other saving throws, this one
as well as resistance to ali nonmagical damage, the isn't tied to any ability score. Vou are in the hands of fate
damage of a nonmagical fire is reduced by half against now, aided only by spells and features that improve your
the creature, not reduced by three-quarters. chances of succeeding on a saving throw.

HEALING Roll a d20. If lhe roll is 10 or higher, you succeed.
Otherwise, you fai!' A success or failure has no effect
Unless it results in death, damage isn't permanent. Even by itself. On your third success. you become stable (see
death is reversible through powerful magic. Rest can below). On your third failure, you die. The successes
restore a creature's hit points (as explained in chapter and failures don't need to be consecutive; keep track
8), and magical methods such as a cure wOllnds spell or of both until you collect three of a kind. The number of
a potion of healing can remove damage in an instant. both is reset to zero when you regain any hit points or
become stable.
When a creature receives healing of any kind, hit
points regained are added to its current hit points. A Ro/ling 1 or 20. When you make a death saving throw
creature's hit points can't exceed its hit point maximum, and roll a 1 on the d20, it counts as two failures. lf you
so any hit points regained in excess of this number are roll a 20 on the d20, you regain 1 hit point.
lost. For example, a druid granls a ranger 8 hit points of
healing. If the ranger has 14 current hit points and has a Damageat OHit Points. lfyou take any damage while
hit point maximum of 20, the ranger regains 6 hit points you have O hit points, you suffer a death saving throw
from the druid, not 8. failure. If the damage is from a criticai hit, you suffcr
two failures instead. lf lhe damage equals or exceeds
A creature that has died can't regain hit points until your hit point maximum, you suffer instant death.
magic such as the revivify spell has restored it to life.
STABILIZING A CREATURE
DROPPING TO O HIT POINTS
The best way to save a creature with O hit points is to
When you drop to O hit points, you either die outright or heal it. If healing is unavailable, the creature can at
fali unconscious, as explained in the following sections. least be stabilized so that it isn't killed by a failed death
saving throw.
INSTANT DEATH
Vou can use your action to administer first aid to an
Massive damage can kill you instantly. When damage unconscious creature and altempt to stabilize it, which
reduces you to O hit points and there is damage
remaining, you die if the remaining damage equals requires a successful De 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check.
or exceeds your hit point maximum.
A stab1e creature doesn't make death saving throws,
For example, a cleric with a maximum of even though it has O hit points, but it does remain
12 hit points currently has 6 hit points. If she unconscious. The creature stops being stable, and must
takes 18 damage from an attack, she is reduced
to O hit points, but 12 damage remains. Because
the remaining damage equals her hit point
maximum, the cleric dies.

FALLING UNCONSCIOUS

lf damage reduces you to O hit points and fails to kill
you, you fali unconscious (see appendix A). This
unconsciousness ends if you regain any hit points.


start making death saving throws again, if it takes any MOUNTING AND DISMOUNTING
damage. A stable creature that isn't healed regains
I hit point after Id4 hours. Once during your move, you can mount a creature that
is within 5 feet of you or dismount. Doing so costs an
MONSTERS AND DEATH amount of movement equal to half your speed. For
Most DMs have a monster die the instant it drops to example, if your speed is 30 feet, you must spend 15
O hit points, rather than having it fali unconscious and feet of movement to mount a horse. Therefore, you can't
make death saving throws. mount it if you don't have 15 feet of movement left or
if your speed is O.
Mighty villains and special nonplayer characters
are common exceptions; the DM might have them If an effect moves your mount against its will while
fali unconscious and follow the same rules as you're on it, you must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity
player characters. saving throw or fali off the mount, landing prone in a
space within 5 feet of it. If you're knocked prone while
KNOCKING A CREATURE OUT mounted, you must make the same saving throw.

Sometimes an attacker wants to incapacitate a foe, 1fyour mount is knocked prone, you can use your
rather than deal a killing blow. When an attacker reaction to dismount it as it falls and land on your feet.
reduces a creature to Ohit points with a melee attack, Otherwise, you are dismounted and fali prone in a
the attacker can knock the creature out. The attacker space within 5 feet it.
can make this choice the instant the damage is dealt.
The creature falls unconscious and is stable. CONTROLLING A MOUNT

TEMPORARY HIT POINTS While you're mounted, you have two options. Vou
can either control the mount or allow it to act
Some spells and special abilities confer temporary hit independently. Intelligent creatures, such as dragons,
points to a creature. Temporary hit points aren't actual act independently.
hit points: they are a buffer against damage, a pool of hit
points that protect you from injury. Vou can controI a mount only if it has been trained
to accept a rider. Domesticated horses, donkeys, and
When you have temporary hit points and take damage, similar creatures are assumed to have such training.
the temporary hit points are lost first, and any leftover The initiative of a controlled mount changes to match
damage carries over to your normal hit points. For yours when you mount it. 1t moves as you direct it, and
example, if you have 5 temporary hit points and take it has only three action options; Dash, Disengage, and
7 damage, you lose the temporary hit points and then Dodge. A controlled mount can move and act even on
take 2 damage. the tu rn that you mount it.

Because temporary hit points are separate from An independent mount retains its place in the
your actual hit points, they can exceed your hit point initiative order. Bearing a rider puts no restrictions on
maximum. A character can, therefore, be at full hit the actions the mount can take, and it moves and acts
points and receive temporary hit points. as it wishes. 1t might flee from combat, rush to attack
and devour a badly injured foe, or otherwise act against
Healing can't restore temporary hit points, and they your wishes.
can't be added together. If you have temporary hit points
and receive more of them, you decide whether to keep In either case, if the mount provokes an opportunity
the ones you have or to gain the new ones. For example, attack while you're on it, the attacker can target you
if a spell grants you 12 temporary hit points when you or the mount.
already have lO, you can have 12 or lO, not 22.
UNDERWATER COMBAT
lf you have O hit points, receiving temporary hit points
doesn't restore you to consciousness or stabilize you. When adventurers pursue sahuagin back to their
They can still absorb damage directed at you while undersea homes, fight off sharks in an ancient
you're in that state, but only true healing can save you. shipwreck, or find themselves in a flooded dungeon
room, they must fight in a challenging environment.
Unless a feature that grants you temporary hit points Underwater the following rules apply.
has a duration, they last until they're depleted or you
finish a long resto When making a me1ee weapon attack, a creature
that doesn't have a swimming speed (either natural or
MOUNTED COMBAT granted by magic) has disadvantage on the attack roll
unless the weapon is a dagger, javelin, shortsword,
A knight charging into battle on a warhorse, a wizard spear, or trident.
casting spells from the back of a griffon, or a c1eric
soaring through the sky on a pegasus ali enjoy the A ranged weapon attack automatically misses
benefits of speed and mobility that a mount can provide. a target beyond the weapon's normal range. Even
against a target within normal range, the attack roll has
A willing creature that is at least one size larger than disadvantage unless the weapon is a crossbow, a net, or
you and that has an appropriate anatomy can serve as a a weapon that is thrown like a javelin (including a spear,
mount, using the following rules. trident, or dart).

Creatures and objects that are fully immersed in
water have resistance to fire damage.

PART 2 I COMBAT


PARI 3
The Rules af Magic .
PART 3 I Til E RULES OF MAGIC
CHAPTER 10: SPELLCASTING

AGIC PERMEATES THE WORLDS OF D&D AND In every case, the number of spells a caster can
have fixed in mind at any given time depends on the
most often appears in the form of a spell. character's leveI.
This chapter provides the rules for
casting spells. Different character SPELL SLOTS
classes have distinctive ways of learning
and preparing their spells, and monsters Regardless of how many spells a caster knows or
use spells in unique ways. Regardless of its source, prepares, he or she can cast only a limited number of
a spell follows the rules here. spells before resting. Manipulating the fabric of magic
and channeling its energy into even a simple spell is
WHAT 1s A SPELL? physically and mentally taxing, and higher-Ievel spells
are even more so. Thus, each spellcasting class's
A spell is a discrete magical effect, a single shaping description (except that of the warlock) includes a table
of the magical energies that suffuse the multiverse showing how many spell slots of each spelllevel a
into a specific, limited expression. In casting a spell, character can use at each character leveI. For example,
a character carefully plucks at the invisible strands of the 3rd-level wizard Umara has four 1st-levei spell slots
raw magic suffusing the world, pins them in place in a and two 2nd-levei slots.
particular pattern, sets them vibrating in a specific way,
and then releases them to unleash the desired effect-in When a character casts a spell, he or she expends
most cases, ali in the span of seconds. a slot of that spell's levei or higher, effectively "filling"
a slot with the spell. Vou can think of a spell slot as a
Spells can be versatile tools, weapons, or protective groove of a certain size-small for a 1st-levei slot,larger
wards. They can deal damage or undo it, impose or for a spell of higher leveI. A 1st-levei spell fits into a slot
remove conditions (see appendix A), drain life energy of any size, but a 9th-levei spell fits only in a 9th-levei
away, and restore life to the dead. si01. So when Umara casts magic missile, a 1st-levei
spell, she spends one of her four 1st-levei slots and has
Uncounted thousands of spells have been created three remaining.
over the course of the multiverse's history, and many of
them are long forgotten. Some might yet lie recorded in Finishing a long rest restores any expended spell slots
crumbling spellbooks hidden in ancient ruins or trapped (see chapter 8 for the rules on resting).
in the minds of dead gods. Or they might someday be
reinvented by a character who has amassed enough Some characters and monsters have special abilities
power and wisdom to do sO. that let them cast spells without using spell slots. For
example, a monk who follows the Way of the Four
SPELL LEVEL Elements, a warlock who chooses certain eldritch
invocations, and a pit fiend from the Nine Hells can ali
Every spell has a levei from O to 9. A spell's levei is a cast spells in such a way.
general indicator of how powerful it is. with the lowly
(but still impressive) magic missile at 1st levei and CASTlNG A SPELL AT A HIGHER LEVEL
the earth-shaking wish at 9th. Cantrips-simple but When a spellcaster casts a spell using a slot that is of a
powerful spells that characters can cast almost by rote- higher levei than the spell, the spell assumes the higher
are levei O. The higher a spell's levei, the higher levei a levei for that casting. For instance, if Umara casts magic
spellcaster must be to use that spell. missile using one of her 2nd-levei slots, that magic
missile is 2nd leveI. Effectively, the spell expands to fill
Spelllevel and character levei don't correspond the slot it is put into.
directly. Typically, a character has to be at least 17th
levei, not 9th levei, to cast a 9th-leveI spell. Some spells, sue h as magic missile and cure wounds,
have more powerful effects when cast at a higher levei,
KNOWN AND PREPARED SPELLS as detailed in a spell's description.

Before a spellcaster can use a spell, he or she must CANTRIPS
have the spell firmly fixed in mind, or must have access
to the spell in a magic item. Members of a few classes, A cantrip is a spell that can be cast at will, without
including bards and sorcerers, have a limited list of using a spell slot and without being prepared in
spells they know that are always fixed in mind. The advance. Repeated practice has fixed the spell in the
same thing is true of many magic-using monsters. Other caster's mind and infused the caster with the magic
spellcasters, such as clerics and wizards, undergo a needed to produce the effect over and over. A cantrip's
process of preparing spells. This process varies for spelllevel is O.
different classes, as detailed in their descriptions.
RITUALS
4•
Certain spells have a special tag: ritual. Such a spell
CASTING IN ARMOR ean be cast following the normal rules for spelleasting,
or the spell can be cast as a ritual. The ritual version of
Because ofthe mental focus and precise gestures required a spell takes 10 minutes longer to cast than normal.
for spellcasting, you must be proncient with the armor you
are wearing to cast a spell. Vou are otherwise too distracted r

and physically hampered by your armor for spellcasting.
~

PART 3 SPELU ...\STI "G

20


It also doesn't expend a spell slot, which means the
ritual version of a spell can't be cast at a higher leveI.

To cast a spell as a ritual, a spellcaster must have a
feature that grants the ability to do so. The cleric and the
druid, for example, have such a feature. The caster must
also have the spell prepared or on his or her list of spells
known, unless the character's ritual feature specifies
otherwise, as the wizard's does.

CASTING A SPELL

When a character casts any spell, the same basic rules
are followed, regardless of the character's class or the
spell's effects.

Each spell description in chapter li begins with a block
of information, including the spell's name, levei,school
of magic, casting time, range, components, and duration.
The rest of a spell entry describes the spell's effect.

CASTING TIME

Most spells require a single action to cast, but some
spells require a bonus action, a reaction, or much more
time to cast.

BONUS ACTION
A spell cast with a bonus action is especially swift. Vou
must use a bonus action on your turn to cast the spell,
provided that you haven't already taken a bonus action
this turno Vou can't cast another spell during the same
turn, except for a cantrip with a casting time of I action.

REACTIONS
Some spells can be cast as reactions. These spells
take a fraction of a second to bring about and are cast
in response to some event. If a spell can be cast as a
reaction, the spell description tells you exactly when
you can do sO.

LONGE R CASTING TIMES
Certain spells (including spells cast as rituais) require
more time to cast: minutes or even hours. When you
cast a spell with a casting time longer than a single
action or reaction, you must spend your action each
turn casting the spell, and you must maintain your
concentration while you do so (see "Concentration"
below). ]f your concentration is broken, the spell fails,
but you don't expend a spell slot. ]f you want to try
casting the spell again, you must start over.

RANGE

The target of a spell must be within the spell's range.
For a spelllike magic missile, the target is a creature.
For a spelllike firebaJl, the target is the point in space
where the ball of fire erupts.

Most spells have ranges expressed in feet. Some
spells can target only a creature (including you) that you
touch. Other spells. such as the shield spell, affect only
you. These spells have a range of self.

Spells that create cones or lines of effect that originate
from you also have a range of self, indicating that the
origin point af the spell's effect must be yau (see "Areas
af Effect" later in the this chapter).


Once a spell is cast, its effects aren't limited by its 4 ••
range, unless the spell's description says otherwise.
THE SCHOOLS OF MAGIC
COMPONENTS
Academies of magic group spells into eight categories called
A spell's components are the physical requirements you
must meet in order to cast it. Each spell's description schools of magic. Scholars, particularly wizards, apply these
indicates whether it requires verbal (V), somatic (S),
or material (M) components. Ifyou can't provide one categories to ali spells, believing that ali magic functions in
or more of a spell's components, you are unable to
cast the spell. essentially the same way, whether it derives from rigorous

VERBAL (V) study ar is bestowed by a deity.
Most spells require the chanting of mystic words. The
words themselves aren't the source of the spell's power; The schools of magic help describe spells; they have no
rather, the particular combination of sounds, with
specific pitch and resonance, sets the threads of magic rules oftheir own, although some rules refer to the schools.
in molion. Thus, a character who is gagged or in an area
of silence, such as one created by the siJence spell, can't Abjuration spells are protective in nature, though some
cast a spell with a verbal component.
of them have aggressive uses. They create magical barriers,
SOMATIC (S)
Spellcasting gestures might include a forceful negate harmful effects, harm trespassers, ar banish creatures
gesticulation or an intricate set of gestures. If a spell
requires a somalic component, the caster must have free to other planes of existence.
use of at least one hand to perform these gestures.
Conjuration spells involve the transportation of objects
MATERIAL (M)
Casting some spells requires particular objects, and creatures from one location to another. Some spells
specified in parentheses in the component entry.
A character can use a component pouch or a summon creatures ar objects to the caster's side, whereas
speIlcasting focus (found in chapter 5) in place of
the components specified for a spell. But if a cost is others allow the caster to teleport to another location. Some
indicated for a component, a character must have that
specific component before he or she can cast the spell. conjurations create objects or effects out of nothing.

If a spell states that a material component is Divinalion spells reveal information, whether in the form of
consumed by the spell, the caster must provide this
component for each casting of the spell. secrets long forgoUen, glimpses of the future, the locations

A spellcaster must have a hand free to access these of hidden things, the truth behind illusions, ar visions of
components, but it can be the same hand that he or she
uses to perform somatic components. dislanl people or places.

DURATION Enchanlmenl spells affecl lhe minds of olhers, influencing

A spell's duration is the length of time the spell persists. ar controlling lheir behavior. Such spells can make enemies
A duration can be expressed in rounds, minutes, hours,
or even years. Some spells specify that their effects last see lhe casler as a friend, force crealures lo lake a course of
until the spells are dispelled or destroyed.
aclion, ar even conlrol anolher crealure like a puppet.
INSTANTANEOUS
Many spells are instantaneous. The spell harms, Evocalion spells manipulate magical energy lo produce a
heals, creates, or alters a creature or an object in a way
that can't be dispelled, beca use its magic exists only desired eITect. Some call up blasts offire ar lighlning. Olhers
for an instant.
channel posilive energy to heal wounds.
CONCENTRATION
Some spells require you to maintain concentration JIIusion spells deceive lhe senses ar minds of olhers. They
in order to keep their magic active. If you lose
concentration, such a spell ends. cause people lo see lhings lhal are nol lhere, lo miss lhings

If a spell must be maintained with concentralion, lhat are there, to hear phanlom noises, ar lo remember
that fact appears in its Duration entry, and lhe spell
specifics how long you can concentrate on it. Vou can lhings lhal never happened. Some illusions creale phanlom
end concentration at any time (no action required).
images lhal any creature can see, but lhe mosl insidious

illusions planl an image direclly in lhe mind of a crealure.

Necromancy spells manipulale the energies oflife and

dealh. Such spells can granl an exlra reserve oflife force,

drain the life energy from anolher crealure, create the

undead, ar even bring the dead back to life.

Creating the undead lhrough lhe use of necromancy spells

such as animate dead is not a good acl, and only evil caslers

use such spells frequenlly.

Transmulalion spells change lhe properties of a crealure,

object, ar environmenl. They mighl lum an enemy inlo a

harmless creature. bolsler the slrength of an ally, make an

object move aI the casler's command, ar enhance a crealure's

innale healing abililies lo rapidly recover from injury. •••

••

Normal activity, such as moving and attacking, doesn't
interfere with concentration. The following factors can
break concentration:

Casting another speIl that requires concentration.
Vou lose concentration on a spell if you cast another
spell that requires concentration. Vou can't concen-
trate on two spells at once.
Taking damage. Whenever you take damage while
you are concentrating on a spell, you must make a
Constitution saving throw to maintain your concentra-
tion. The DC equals 10 or half the damage you take,
whichever number is higher.lfyou take damage from
multiple sources, such as an arrow and a dragon's
breath, you make a separate saving throw for each
source of damage.
Being incapacilated or kilIed. Vou lose concentration
on a spell if you are incapacitated or if you die.

PART 3 I SrF.l LCASTI NG

203


The DM might also decide that certain environmental pasition its point of origino Typically,
phenomena, such as a wave crashing over you while a point of origin is a point in space, but
you're on a storm-tossed ship, require you to succeed some spells have an area whose origin is a
on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw to maintain creature or an object.
concentration on a spell.
A spell's effect expands in straight lines fram the point
TARGETS of origino If no unblocked straight line extends from the
point of origin to a location within the area of effect, that
A typical spell requires you to pick one or more targets location isn't included in the spell's area. To block one of
to be affected by the spell's magic. A spell's description these imaginary lines, an obstruction must provi de total
tells you whether the spell targets creatures, objects, or cover, as explained in chapter 9.
a point of origin for an area of effect (described below).
CONE
Unless a spell has a perceptible effect, a creature
might not know it was targeted by a spell at alI. An effect A cone extends in a direction you choose fram its point
like crackling lightning is obvious, but a more subtle af origino A cone's width at a given point along its length
effect, such as an attempt to read a creature's thoughts, is equal to that point's distance from the point of origino
typically goes unnoticed, unless a spell says otherwise. A cone's area of effect specities its maximum length.

A CLEAR PATH TO THE TARGET A cone's point of origin is not included in the cone's
To target something, you must have a clear path to it, area of effect, unless you decide otherwise.
so it can't be behind total cover.
CUBE
lf you place an area of effect at a point that you can't
see and an obstruction. such as a wall, is between you Vou select a cube's point of origin, which lies anywhere
and that point, the point of origin comes into being on on a face of the cubic effect. The cube's size is expressed
the near side of that obstruction. as the length of each side.

TARGETING YOURSELF A cube's point of origin is not included in the cube's
area of effect, unless you decide otherwise.
lf a spell targets a creature of your choice, you can
choose yourself, unless the creature must be hostile or CYLINDER
speciticallya creature other than you. lf you are in the
area of effect of a spell you cast, you can target yourself. A cylinder's point of origin is the center of a circle of a
particular radius, as given in the spell description. The
AREAS OF EFFECT circle must either be on the graund or at the height of
the spell effect. The energy in a cylinder expands in
Spells such as burning hands and cone of cald cover an straight lines from the point of origin to the perimeter of
area, allawing them to affect multiple creatures at ance. the circle, forming the base of the cylinder. The spell's
effect then shoots up fram the base or down fram the
A spell's description specities its area af effect, top, to a distance equal to the height of the cylinder.
which typically has ane of tive different shapes: cone,
cube, cylinder, line, ar sphere. Every area of effect has A cylinder's point of origin is included in the cylinder's
a paint of origin, a locatian fram which the spell's area of effect.
energy erupts. The roles for each shape specify how yau

204 PART 3 I SPELLCASTINO


LINE 4 ••
Aline extends from its point of origin in a straight path lHE WEAVE OF MAGIC
up to its length and covers an area defined by its width.
lhe worlds within the D&D multiverse are magical places.
A line's point of origin is not included in the line's area Ali existence is suffused with magical power, and potential
of effect, unless you decide otherwise. energy lies untapped in every rock, stream, and living
creature, and even in the air itself. Raw magic is the stuff of
SPHERE creation, the mute and mindless will of existence, permeating
Vou select a sphere's point of origin, and the sphere every bit of malter and present in every manifestation of
extends outward from that point. The sphere's energy throughout the multiverse.
size is expressed as a radius in feet that extends
from the point. Mortais can't directly shape this raw magic. Instead, they
make use of a fabric of magic, a kind of interface between
A sphere's point of origin is included in the sphere's the will of a spellcaster and the stuff of raw magic. lhe
area of effect. spellcasters of the Forgotten Realms call it the Weave and
recagnize its essence as the goddess Mystra, but casters
SAVING THROWS have varied ways of naming and visualizing this interface. Sy
any name, without the Weave, raw magic is locked away and
Many spells specify that a target can make a saving inaccessible;the most powerful archmage can't light a candle
throw to avoid some or ali of a spell's effects. The spell with magic in an area where the Weave has been tom. Sut
specifies the ability that the target uses for the save and surrounded by the Weave, a spellcaster can shape lightning
what happens on a success or failure. to blast foes, transport hundreds of miles in the blink of an
eye, or even reverse death itself.
The De to resist one of your spells equals 8 + your
spellcasting ability modifier + your proficiency bonus + Ali magic depends on the Weave, though different kinds
of magic access it in a variety of ways. lhe spells of wizards,
any special modifiers. warlocks, sorcerers, and bards are commonly called arcane
magic. lhese spells rely on an understanding-Iearned or
ATTACK ROLLS intuitive-of the workings of the Weave. lhe caster plucks
directly at the strands of the Weave to create the desired
Some spells require the caster to make an attack roll effect. Eldritch knights and arcane tricksters also use arcane
to determine whether the spell effect hits the intended magic. lhe spells of derics, druids, paladins, and rangers are
target. Your attack bonus with a spell attack equals your called divine magic. lhese spellcasters' access to the Weave
is mediated by divine power-gods, the divine forces of
spellcasting ability modifier + your proficiency bonus. nature, or the sacred weight of a paladin's oath.

Most spells that require attack rolls involve ranged Whenever a magic effect is created, the threads of the
attacks. Remember that you have disadvantage on a Weave intertwine, twist, and fold to make the effect possible.
ranged attack roll if you are within 5 feet of a hostile When characters use divination spells such as detect magic or
creature that can see you and that isn't incapacitated identify, they glimpse the Weave. A spell such as dispel magic
(see chapter 9). smooths the Weave. Spells such as antimagic field rearrange
the Weave 50 that magic fiows around, rather than through,
COMBINING MAGICAL EFFECTS the area affected by the spell. And in places where the Weave
is damaged or tom, magic works in unpredictable ways-or
The effects of different spells add together while not at alI.
the durations of those spells overlap. The effects of
the same spell cast multi pie times don't combine,
however. lnstead, the most potent effect-such as the
highest bonus-from those castings applies while their
durations overlap.

For example, if two clerics cast bless on the same
target, that character gains the spell's benefit only
once; he or she doesn't get to roll two bonus dice.


CHAPTER 11: SPELLS

~ HIS CHAPTER DESCRIBES THE MOST COMMON Hold Monster 1ST LEVEL
Legend Lore
speIls in the worlds of DUNGEONS & Mass Cure Wounds Bane
DRAGONs. The chapter begins with the Mislead Bless
speIl Iists of the speIlcasting classes. The Modify Memory Command
remainder contains speIl descriptions, Planar Binding Create or Destroy Water
presented in alphabetical order by the Raise Dead Cure Wounds
name of the spell. Scrying Detect Evil and Good
Seeming Detect Magic
BARD SPELLS Hold Person Teleportation Ci rcle Detect Poison and Disease
Invisibility Guiding Bolt
CANTRIPS (O LEVEL) Knock 6TH LEVEL Healing Word
Lesser Restoration Inflict Wounds
Blade Ward Locate Animais or Plants Eyebite Protection from
Dancing Lights Locate Object Find the Path
Friends Magic Mouth Guards and Wards Evil and Good
Light Phantasmal Force Mass Suggestion Purify Food and Drink
Mage Hand See Invisibility Olto's Irresistible Dance Sanctuary
Mending Shalter Programmed IlIusion Shield of Faith
Message Silence True Seeing
Minor IlIusion Suggestion 2ND LEVEL
Prestidigitation Zone ofTruth 7TH LEVEL
True Strike Aid
Vicious Mockery 3RD LEVEL Etherealness Augury
Forcecage Blindness/Deafness
1ST LEVEL Bestow Curse Mirage Arcane Calm Emotions
Clairvoyance Mordenkainen's Continuai Flame
Animal Friendship Dispel Magic Enhance Ability
Bane Fear Magnificent Mansion Find Traps
Charm Person Feign Death Mordenkainen's Sword Gentle Repose
Comprehend Languages Glyph ofWarding Project Image Hold Person
Cure Wounds Hypnotic Pattem Regenerate Lesser Restoration
Detect Magic Leomund's Tiny Hut Resurrection Locate Object
Disguise Self Major Image Symbol Prayer of Healing
Dissonant Whispers Nondetection Teleport Protection from Poison
Faerie Fire Plant Growth Silence
Feather Fali Sending 8TH LEVEL Spiritual Weapon
Healing Word Speak with Dead Warding Bond
Heroism Speak with Plants Dominate Monster Zone ofTruth
Identify Stinking Cloud Feeblemind
IlIusory Script Tongues Glibness 3RD LEVEL
Longstrider Mind Blank
Silent Image 4TH LEVEL Power Word Stun Animate Dead
Sleep Beacon of Hope
Speak with Animais Compulsion 9TH LEVEL Bestow Curse
Tasha's Hideous Laughter Confusion Clairvoyance
Thunderwave Dimension ODor Foresight Create Food and Water
Unseen Servant Freedom of Movement Power Word Heal Daylight
Greater Invisibility Power Word Kill Dispel Magic
2ND LEVEL Hallucinatory Terrain True Polymorph Feign Death
Locate Creature Glyph ofWarding
Animal Messenger Polymorph CLERIC SPELLS Magic Circle
Blindness/Deafness Mass Healing Word
Calm Emotions 5TH LEVEL CANTRIPS (o LEVEL) Meld into Stone
Cloud of Daggers Guidance Protection from Energy
Crown of Madness Animate Objects Light Remove Curse
Detect Thoughts Awaken Mending Revivify
Enhance Ability Dominate Person Resistance Sending
Enthrall Dream Sacred Flame Speak with Dead
Heat Metal Geas Spare the Dying
Greater Restoration Thaumaturgy PART 3 SPfLlS

,"


Spirit Guardians Gate Dispel Magic Mirage Arcane
Tongues Mass Heal Feign Death Plane Shift
Water Walk True Resurrection Meld into Stone Regenerate
Plant Growth Reverse Gravity
4TH LEVEL DRUID SPELLS Protection from Energy
Sleet Storm 8TH LEVEL
Banishment CANTRIPS (o LEVEL) Speak with Plants
Control Water Druidcraft Water Breathing Animal Shapes
Death Ward Guidance Water Walk AntipathyjSympathy
Divination Mending Wind Wall Control Weather
Freedom of Movement Poison Spray Earthquake
Guardian of Faith Produce Flame 4TH LEVEL Feeblemind
Locate Creature Sunburst
Stone Shape Resistance Blight Tsunami
Shillelagh Confusion
5TH LEVEL Thorn Whip Conjure Minor Elementals 9TH LEVEL
Commune Conjure Woodland Beings
1ST LEVEL Control Water Foresight
Contagion Dominate Beast Shapechange
Dispel Evil and Good Animal Friendship Freedom of Movement Storm ofVengeance
Flame Strike Charm Person Giant Insect True Resurrection
Geas Create or Destroy Water Grasping Vine
Greater Restoration Cure Wounds Hallucinatory Terrain PALADIN SPELLS
Hallow Detect Magic Ice Storm
Insect Plague Detect Poison and Disease Locate Creature 1ST LEVEL
Legend Lore Entangle Polymorph
Mass Cure Wounds Faerie Fire Stone Shape Bless
Planar Binding Fog Cloud Stoneskin Command
Raise Dead Goodberry Wall of Fire Compelled Duel
Scrying Healing Word Cure Wounds
jump 5TH LEVEL Detect Evil and Good
6TH LEVEL Longstrider Detect Magic
Purify Food and Drink Antilife Shell Detect Poison and Disease
Blade Barrier Speak with Animais Awaken Divine Favor
Create Undead Thunderwave Commune with Nature Heroism
Find the Path Conjure Elemental Protection from
Forbiddance 2ND LEVEL Contagion
Harm Geas Evil and Good
Heal Animal Messenger Greater Restoration Purify Food and Drink
Heroes' Feast Barkskin Insect Plague Searing Smite
Planar Ally Beast Sense Mass Cure Wounds Shield of Faith
True Seeing Darkvision Planar Binding Thunderous Smite
Word of Recall Enhance Ability Reincarnate Wrathful Smite
Find Traps Scrying
7TH LEVEL Flame Blade Tree Stride 2ND LEVEL
Flaming Sphere Wall ofStone
Conjure Celestial Gust ofWind Aid
Divine Word Heat Metal 6TH LEVEL Branding Smite
Etherealness Hold Person Find Steed
Fire Storm Lesser Restoration Conjure Fey Lesser Restoration
Plane Shift Locate Animais or Plants Find the Path Locate Object
Regenerate Locate Object Heal Magic Weapon
Resurrection Moonbeam Heroes' Feast Protection from Poison
Symbol Pass without Trace Move Earth Zone ofTruth
Protection from Poison Sunbeam
8TH LEVEL Spike Growth Transport via Plants 3RD LEVEL
Wall ofThorns
Antimagic Field 3RD LEVEL Wind Walk Aura ofVitality
Control Weather Blinding Smite
Earthquake Call Lightning 7TH LEVEL Create Food and Water
Holy Aura Conjure Animais Crusader's Mantle
Daylight Fire Storm Daylight
9TH LEVEL Dispel Magic
Elemental Weapon
Astral Projection

208 PART 3 I SPFLLS


Magic Circle Plant Growth Sleep Greater Invisibility
Remove Curse Protection from Energy Thunderwave Ice Storm
Revivify Speak with Plants Witch Bolt Polymorph
Water Breathing Stoneskin
4TH LEVEL Water Walk 2ND LEVEL Wall of Fire
Wind Wall
Aura of Life Alter Self 5TH LEVEL
Aura of Purity 4TH LEVEL BlindnessjDeafness
Banishment Blur Animate Objects
Death Ward Conjure Woodland Beings Cloud of Daggers Cloudkill
Locate Creature Freedom of Movement Crown of Madness Cone ofCold
Staggering Smite Grasping Vine Darkness ereation
Locate Creature Darkvision Dominate Person
5TH LEVEL Stoneskin Detect Thoughts Hold Monster
Enhance Ability Insect Plague
Banishing Smite 5TH LEVEL EnlargejReduce Seeming
Cirele of Power Gust ofWind Telekinesis
Destructive Smite Commune with Nature Hold Person Teleportation Cirele
Dispel Evil and Good Conjure Volley Invisibility Wall of Stone
Geas Swift Quiver Knock
Raise Dead Tree Stride Levitate 6TH LEVEL
Mirror Image
RANGER SPELLS SORCERER SPELLS Misty Step Arcane Gate
Phantasmal Force Chain Lightning
1ST LEVEL CANTRIPS (O LEVEL) Scorching Ray Cirele of Death
See Invisibility Disintegrate
Alarm Acid Splash Shatter Eyebite
Animal Friendship Blade Ward Spider Climb Globe of Invulnerability
Cure Wounds Chill Touch Suggestion Mass Suggestion
Detect Magic Dancing Lights Web Move Earth
Detect Poison and Disease Fire Bolt Sunbeam
Ensnaring Strike Friends 3RD LEVEL True Seeing
Fog Cloud Light
Goodberry Mage Hand Blink 7TH LEVEL
Hail ofThorns Mending Clairvoyance
Hunter's Mark Message Counterspell Delayed Blast Fireball
)ump Minor IlIusion Daylight Etherealness
Longstrider Poison Spray Dispel Magic Finger of Death
Speak with Animais Prestidigitation Fear Fire Storm
Ray of Frost Fireball Plane Shift
2ND LEVEL Shocking Grasp Fly Prismatic Spray
True Strike Gaseous Form Reverse Gravity
Animal Messenger Haste Teleport
Barkskin 1ST LEVEL Hypnotic Pattern
Beast Sense Lightning Bolt 8TH LEVEL
Cordon of Arrows Burning Hands Major Image
Darkvision Charm Person Protection from Energy Dominate Monster
Find Traps Chromatic Orb Sleet Storm Earthquake
Lesser Restoration Color Spray Slow Incendiary Cloud
Locate Animais or Plants Comprehend Languages Stinking Cloud Power Word Stun
Locate Object Detect Magic Tongues Sunburst
Pass without Trace Disguise Sei f Water Breathing
Protection from Poison Expeditious Retreat Water Walk 9TH LEVEL
Silence False Life
Spike Growth Feather Fali 4TH LEVEL Gate
Fog Cloud Meteor Swarm
3RD lEVEL jump Banishment Power Word Kill
Mage Armor Blight Time Stop
Conjure Animais Magic Missile Confusion Wish
Conjure Barrage Ray of Sickness Dimension Door
Daylight Shield Dominate Beast
Lightning Arrow Silent Image
Nondetection

PART 3 I SPELLS

2°9


WARLOCK SPELLS Dimension Door 1ST LEVEL Misty Step
Hallucinatory Terrain Nystul's Magic Aura
CANTRIPS (o LEVEL) Alarm Phantasmal Force
5TH LEVEL Burning Hands Ray of Enfeeblement
Blade Ward Contact Other Plane Charm Person Rope Trick
Chill Touch Dream Chromatic Orb Scorching Ray
Eldritch Blast Hold Monster Color Spray See Invisibility
Friends Scrying Comprehend Languages Shatter
Mage Hand Detect Magic Spider Climb
Minor IlIusion 6TH LEVEL Disguise Self Suggestion
Poison Spray Arcane Gate Expeditious Retreat Web
Prestidigitation Cirele of Death False Life
True Strike Conjure Fey Feather Fali 3RD LEVEL
Create Undead Find Familiar
1ST LEVEL Eyebite Fog Cloud Animate Dead
Armor of Agathys Flesh to Stone Grease Bestow Curse
Arms of Hadar Mass Suggestion Identify Blink
Charm Person True Seeing IlIusory Script Clairvoyance
Comprehend Languages jump Counterspell
Expeditious Retreat 7TH LEVEL Longstrider Dispel Magic
Hellish Rebuke Etherealness Mage Armor Fear
Hex Finger of Death Magic Missile Feign Death
IlIusory Script Forcecage Protection from Fireball
Protection from Plane Shift Fly
Evil and Good Gaseous Form
Evil and Good 8TH LEVEL Ray of Sickness Glyph ofWarding
Unseen Servant Demiplane Shield Haste
Witch Bolt Dominate Monster Silent Image Hypnotic Pattern
Feeblemind Sleep Leomund's Tiny Hut
2ND LEVEL Glibness Tasha's Hideous Laughter Lightning Bolt
Cloud of Daggers Power Word Stun Tenser's Floating Disk Magic Cirele
Crown of Madness Thunderwave Major Image
Darkness 9TH LEVEL Unseen Servant Nondetection
Enthrall Astral Projection Witch Bolt Phantom Steed
Hold Person Foresight Protection from Energy
Invisibility Imprisonment 2ND LEVEL Remove Curse
Mirror Image Power Word Kill Sending
Misty Step True Polymorph Alter Self Sleet Storm
Ray of Enfeeblement Arcane Lock Slow
Shatter WIZARD SPELLS Blindness/Deafness Stinking Cloud
Spider Climb Blur Tongues
Suggestion CANTRIPS (o LEVEL) Cloud of Daggers Vampiric Touch
Continuai Flame Water Breathing
3RD LEVEL Acid Splash Crown of Madness
Counterspell Blade Ward Darkness 4TH LEVEL
Dispel Magic Chill Touch Darkvision
Fear Dancing Lights Detect Thoughts Arcane Eye
Fly Fire Bolt Enlarge/Reduce Banishment
Gaseous Form Friends Flaming Sphere Blight
Hunger of Hadar Light Gentle Repose Confusion
Hypnotic Pattern Mage Hand Gust ofWind Conjure Minor Elementals
Magic Cirele Mending Hold Person Control Water
Major Image Message Invisibility Dimension ODor
Remove Curse Minor IlIusion Knock Evard's Black Tentades
Tongues Poison Spray Levitate Fabricate
Vampiric Touch Prestidigitation Locate Object Fire Shield
Ray of Frost Magic Mouth Greater Invisibility
4TH LEVEL Shocking Grasp Magic Weapon Hallucinatory Terrain
Banishment True Strike Melf's Acid Arrow Ice Storm
Blight Mirror Image Leomund's Secret Chest

PART 3 I SPELLS

210


Loeale Crealure Sunbeam SPELL DESCRIPTIONS
Mordenkainen's True Seeing
Wall oflee The spells are presented in alphabetical order.
Failhful Hound
Mordenkainen's 7TH LEVEL ACID SPLASH
Conjuration calltrip
Privale Sanelum Delayed BiasI Fireball
Oliluke's Resilienl Sphere Elherealness Casting Time: I action
Phanlasmal Killer Finger of Dealh Range: 60 feel
Polymorph Foreeeage Components: V, S
Slone Shape Mirage Areane Duration: Instantaneous
Sloneskin Mordenkainen's
Wall ofFire Vou hurl a bubble of acid. Choose one creature within
Magnifieenl Mansion range, or choose two crealures within range thal are
5TH LEVEL Mordenkainen's Sword wilhin 5 feet of each other. A target must succeed on a
Plane Shifl Dexterity saving throw or lake Id6 acid damage.
Animale Objeels Prismalie Spray
Bigby's Hand Projeel Image This spell's damage increases by Id6 when you reach
Cloudkill Reverse Gravily 5th leveI (2d6), 11th leveI (3d6), and 17lh leveI (4d6).
Cone ofCold Sequesler
Conjure Elemenlal Simulaerum AID
Conlael Olher Plane Symbol 2nd-leveI abjuration
Crealion Teleporl
Dominale Person Casting Time: I action
Dream 8TH LEVEL Range: 30 feet
Geas Components: V, S, M (a tiny strip of while clOlh)
Hold Monsler Anlimagie Field Duration: 8 hours
Legend Lore Anlipalhy/Sympalhy
Mislead Clone Your spell bolsters your allies with toughness and
Modify Memory Conlrol Wealher resolve. Choose up to three crealures within range.
Passwall Demiplane Each target's hit poinl maximum and current hit points
Planar Binding Dominale Monsler increase by 5 for the duration.
Rary's Telepalhie Bond Feeblemind
Serying Ineendiary Cloud At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
Seeming Maze a spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher, a largel's hit points
Telekinesis Mind Blank increase by an additional 5 for each slot leveI above 2nd.
Teleporlalion Cirele Power Word Slun
Wall of Force Sunbursl ALARM
Wall of Slone Telepalhy 1st-leveI abjuration (ritual)
Trap lhe Soul
6TH LEVEL Casting Time: I minule
9TH LEVEL Range: 30 feet
Areane Gale Components: V. S, M (a tiny bell and a piece of
Chain Lighlning Aslral Projeelion
Cirele of Dealh Foresighl fine silver wire)
Conlingeney Gale Duration: 8 hours
Creale Undead Imprisonmenl
Disinlegrale Meleor Swarm Vou seI an alarm against unwanted inlrusion. Choose
Drawmij's Inslanl Power Word Kill a door. a window, or an area wilhin range that is no
Prismalie Wall larger lhan a 20-foot cube. Until lhe spell ends. an alarm
Summons Shapeehange alerts you whenever a Tiny or larger creature louches
Eyebile Time Slop or enters lhe warded area. When you cast the spell, you
Flesh lo Slone True Polymorph can designale crealures lhat won't set off the alarmo Vou
Globe of Invulnerabilily Weird also choose whether the alarm is mental or audible.
Guards and Wards Wish
Magie Jar A mental alarm alerts you with a ping in your mind
Mass Suggeslion if you are within I mile of the warded area. This ping
Move Earlh awakens you if you are sleeping.
Oliluke's Freezing Sphere
0110'5 Irresislible Dance An audible alarm produces lhe sound of a hand bell
Programmed Illusion for 10 seconds within 60 feel.

ALTER SELF
2nd-leveI transmutation

Casting Time: I action up to I hour
Range: SeI f
Components: V, S
Duration: Concenlralion.

Vou assume a different formo When you cast lhe spell.
choose one of the following options, the effects of which
last for the duralion of the spell. While lhe spelllasts,

PART 3 SPELLS

2Il


you can end one oplion as an aclion lo gain lhe benefils localion, covering aboul 50 miles per 24 hours for a
of a differenl one. flying messenger, or 25 miles for olher animaIs.

AquaticAdaptation. Vou adapl your body lo an When lhe messenger arrives, il delivers your message
aqualic environmenl, sprouting gills and growing lo lhe crealure lhal you described, replicating lhe sound
webbing belween your fingers. Vou can brealhe of your voice. The messenger speaks only lo a crealure
underwaler and gain a swimming speed equal lo your malching lhe descriplion you gave. If lhe messenger
walking speed. doesn'l reach its deslinalion before lhe spell ends, lhe
message is losl, and lhe beasl makes ils way back to
Change Appearance. Vou lransform your appearance. where you casl lhis spell.
Vou decide whal you look like, including your heighl,
weighl, facial fealures, sound of your voice, hair lenglh, At Higher LeveIs. If you casl lhis spell using a spell
coloralion, and dislinguishing characlerislics, if any, slot of 3nd levei or higher, lhe duralion of lhe spell
Vou can make yourself appear as a member of anolher increases by 48 hours for each slol levei above 2nd.
race, lhough none of your slalislics change. Vou also
can'l appear as a crealure of a differenl size lhan you, ANIMAL SHAPES
and your basic shape slays lhe same; ifyou're bipedal, 8th./evel transmutatioIl
you can'l use lhis spell lo become quadrupedal, for
inslance. AI any lime for lhe duralion of lhe spell, you Casting Time: 1 aclion
can use your action lOchange your appearance in Range: 30 feel
lhis way again. Components: V,S
Duration: Concenlralion, up to 24 hours
Natural Weapons. Vou grow claws, fangs, spines,
horns, or a differenl nalural weapon of your choice. Your Your magic lurns others into beasts. Choose any
unarmed slrikes deal ld6 bludgeoning, piercing, or number of willing crealures lhal you can see within
slashing damage, as appropriale lo lhe nalural weapon range. Vou transform each targel into the form of a
you chose, and you are proficienl wilh your unarmed Large or smaller beasl wilh a challenge rating of 4 or
slrikes. Finally, lhe natural weapon is magic and you lower. On subsequent turns, you can use your action to
have a +1 bonus lo lhe atlack and damage rolls you transform affected creatures inlo new forms.
make using it.
The transformation lasls for lhe duration for each
ANIMAL FRIENDSHIP largel, or until the target drops to O hit points or dies.
lst.level enchantment Vou can choose a different form for each larget. A
largel's game stalistics are replaced by the stalislics of
Casting Time: 1 aclion lhe chosen beast, though the largel relains ils alignmenl
Range: 30 feel and Inlelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. The
Components: V,S, M (a morsel of food) largel assumes lhe hil poinls of ils new form, and when
Duration: 24 hours it reverls lo ils normal form, il relurns to the number
of hil points it had before il lransformed. If il reverls as
This spelllels you convince a beasl lhal you mean il no a result of dropping to O hit poinls, any excess damage
harm. Choose a beasl lhal you can see wilhin range. carries over lo ils normal formoAs long as the excess
damage doesn'l reduce lhe crealure's normal form lo O
It musl see and hear you. Ir lhe beast's Inlelligence is hil poinls, it isn'l knocked unconscious. The creature is
limiled in lhe aclions il can perform by lhe nalure of its
4 or higher, lhe spell fails. Olherwise, lhe beasl musl new form, and it can'l speak or casl spells.
succeed on a Wisdom saving lhrow or be charmed
by you for lhe spell's duralion. If you or one of your The largel's gear melds into lhe new formoThe largel
companions harms lhe largel, lhe spells ends. can't aclivate, wield, or olherwise benefil from any of
ils equipment.
At Higher LeveIs. When you casl lhis spell using
a spell sI01 of 2nd leveI or higher, you can affecl one ANIMATE DEAD
addilional beasl for each slol leveI above 1st. 3rd./evel necromancy

ANIMAL MESSENGER Casting Time: 1 minule
2nd.level enchantment (ritual) Range: 10 feel
Components: V, S, M (a drop of blood, a piece of flesh,
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 30 feel and a pinch of bone dust)
Components: V,S, M (a morsel of food) Duration: Inslanlaneous
Duration: 24 hours
This spell creates an undead servant. Choose a pile
By means of lhis spell, you use an animal to deliver a of bones or a corpse of a Medium or Small humanoid
message. Choose a Tiny beasl you can see wilhin range, within range. Your spell imbues lhe targel wilh a foul
such as a squirrel, a blue jay, or a bat. Vou specify a mimicry of life, raising il as an undead crealure. The
localion, which you musl have visiled, and a recipienl largel becomes a skeleton if you chose bones or a
who malches a general descriplion, such as "a man or zombie if you chose a corpse (lhe DM has lhe crealure's
woman dressed in lhe uniform of lhe town guard" or "a game slalislics).
red.haired dwarf wearing a poinled hat." Vou also speak
a message of up lOlwenly-five words. The largel beasl On each of your lurns, you can use a bonus aclion
lravels for lhe duralion of lhe spell loward lhe specified lOmentally command any crealure you made with
lhis spell if lhe creature is within 60 feel of you (if you

PART 3 I SPELLS

212


control multi pie creatures, you can command any or all are 3, and its Charisma is 1. Its speed is 30 feet; if the
of them at the same time, issuing the same command to object lacks legs or other appendages it can use for
each one). Vou decide what action the creature will take locomotion, it instead has a f1yingspeed of 30 feet and
and where it will move during its next turn, or you can can hover. lf the object is securely attached to a surface
issue a general command, such as to guard a particular or a larger object, sue h as a chain bolted to a wall, its
chamber or corridor. lf you issue no commands, the speed is O. It has blindsight with a radius of 30 feet and
creature only defends itself against hostile creatures. is b\ind beyond that distance. When the animated object
Once given an order, the creature continues to follow it drops to O hit points, it reverts to its original object
until its task is complete. form, and any remaining damage carries over to its
original object formo
The creature is under your control for 24 hours,
after which it stops obeying any command you've given lf you command an object to attack, it can make a
it. To maintain control of the creature for another single melee attack against a creature within 5 feet
24 hours, you must cast this spell on the creature of it. [t makes a slam attack with an attack bonus and
again before the current 24-hour period ends. This bludgeoning damage determined by its size. The DM
use of the spell reasserts your control over up to four might rule that a specific object inflicts slashing or
creatures you have animated with this spell, rather than piercing damage based on its formo
animating a new one.
At Higher Leve/s. Ifyou cast this spell using a
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a spell slot of 6th leveI or higher, you can animate two
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, you animate or reassert additional objects for each slot leveI above 5th.
contraI over two additional undead creatures for each
slot levei above 3rd. Each of the creatures must come ANTILIFE SHELL
from a different corpse or pile of bones. 5th-leveI abjuration

ANIMATE OBJECTS Casting Time: I action
5th-leveI transmutation Range: Self (I O-foot radius)
Components: V, S
Casting Time: I action up to I minute Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S A shimmering barrier extends out from you in a IO-foot
Duration: Concentration, radius and moves with you, remaining centered on
you and hedging out creatures other than undead and
Objects come to \ife at your command. Choose up to constrllcts. The barrier lasts for the duration.
ten nonmagical objects within range that are not being
worn or carried. Medium targets count as two objects, The barrier prevents an affected creature from
Large targets count as four objects, Huge targets passing or reaching through. An affected creature
count as eight objects. Vou can't animate any object can cast spells or make attacks with ranged or reach
larger than Huge. Each target animates and becomes a weapons through the barrier.
creature under your contrai until the spell ends or until
reduced to O hit points. If you move so that an affected creatllre is forced to
pass through the barrier, the spell ends.
As a bonus action, you can mentally command any
creature you made with this spell if the creature is ANTIMAGIC FIELD
within 500 feet of you (if you contrai multiple creatures, 8th-leveI abjuration
you can command any or all of them at the same time,
issuing the same command to each one). Vou decide Casting Time: 1 action
what action the creature will take and where it will Range: Self (IO-foot-radius sphere)
move during its next turn, or you can issue a general Components: V, S, M (a pinch of powdered iron or
command, such as to guard a particular chamber or
corridor. If you issue no commands, the creature only iron filings)
defends itself against hostile creatures. Once given Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
an order, the creature continues to follow it until its
task is complete. A 10-foot-radius invisible sphere of antimagic surraunds
you. This area is divorced fram the magical energy that
ANIMATED OB/ECT STATISTICS suffuses the multiverse. Within the sphere, spells can't
be cast, summoned creatures disappear, and even magic
Size H P AC Attack Str Dex items become mundane. Unti! the spell ends, the sphere
4 18 moves with you, centered on you.
Tiny 20 18 +8 to hit, 1d4 + 4 damage 6 14
10 12 Spells and other magical effects, except those created
5mall 25 16 +6 to hit, ld8 + 2 damage 14 10 by an artifact or a deity, are suppressed in the sphere
18 6 and can't protrude into it. A slot expended to cast
Medium 40 13 +5 to hit. 2d6 + 1 damage a suppressed spell is consumed. While an effect is
suppressed, it doesn't function, but the time it spends
Large 50 10 +6 to hit. 2dlO + 2 damage suppressed counts against its duration.

Huge 80 10 +8 to hit. 2d12 + 4 damage Targeted Effects. Spells and other magical effects,
such as ma(jic missi/e and charm person, that target
An animated object is a construct with AC, hit points, a creature or an object in the sphere have no effect
attacks, Strength, and Dexterity determined by its size. on that target.
Its Constitution is 10 and its Intelligence and Wisdom
PART 3 SPELLS
213


Areas ofMagie. The area of another spell or magical move to the nearest safe spot from which it can't see
effect, such as fireball, can't extend into the sphere. the targe!. If the creature moves more than 60 feet from
If the sphere overlaps an area of magic, the part of the target and can't see it, the creature is no longer
the area that is covered by the sphere is suppressed. frightened, but the creature becomes frightened again if
For example, the liames created by a wall of fire are it regains sight of the target or moves within 60 feet of i!.
suppressed within the sphere, creating a gap in the wall
if the overlap is large enough. Sympathy. The enchantment causes the specified
creatures to feel an intense urge to approach the target
Spells. Any active spell or other magical effect on a while within 60 feet of it or able to see it. When such a
creature or an object in the sphere is suppressed while creature can see the target or comes within 60 feet of it,
the creature or object is in i!. the creature must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or
use its movement on each of its turns to enter the area
Magie ltems. The properties and powers of or move within reach of the targe!. When the creature
magic items are suppressed in the sphere. For has done so, it can't willingly move away fram the targe!.
example, a +llongsword in the sphere functions as a
nonmagicallongsword. If the target damages or otherwise harms an affected
creature, the affected crealure can make a Wisdom
A magic weapon's properties and powers are saving throw to end the effect, as described below.
suppressed if it is used against a target in the sphere or
wielded by an attacker in the sphere. If a magic weapon Ending the Elfeet. If an affected creature ends its
or a piece of magic ammunition fully leaves the sphere turn while not within 60 feet of the target or able to see
(for example, if you fire a magic arrow or throw a magic it, the creature makes a Wisdom saving thraw. On a
spear at a target outside the sphere), the magic of the successful save, the creature is no longer affected by
item ceases to be suppressed as soon as it exits. the target and recognizes the feeling of repugnance or
attraction as magical. In addition, a creature affected by
Magieal TraveI. Teleportation and planar travei the spell is allowed another Wisdom saving throw every
fail to work in the sphere, whether the sphere is the 24 hours while the spell persists.
destination or the departure point for such magical
traveI. A portal to another location, world, or plane of A creature that successfully saves against this effect
existence, as well as an opening to an extradimensional is immune to it for 1 minute, after which time it can be
space such as that created by the rope trick spell, affected again.
temporarily doses while in the sphere.
ARCANE EYE
Creatures and Objeets. A creature or object 4th.level divination
summoned or created by magic temporarily winks out
of existence in the sphere. Such a creature instantly Casting Time: 1 action
reappears once the space the creature occupied is no Range: 30 feet
longer within the sphere. Components: V, S, M (a bit of bat fur)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Dispel Magie. Spells and magical effects such as
dispel magic have no effect on the sphere. Likewise, the Vou create an invisible, magical eye within range that
spheres created by different antimagic field spells don't hovers in the air for the duration.
nullify each other.
Vou mentally receive visual information fram the eye,
ANTIPATHy/SYMPATHY which has normal vision and darkvision out to 30 fee!.
The eye can look in every direction.
8th~evelenchantment
As an action, you can move the eye up to 30 feet in
Casting Time: 1 hour any direction. There is no limit to how far away from
Range: 60 feet you the eye can move, but it can't enter another plane
Components: V,S, M (either a lump of alum soaked in of existence. A solid barrier blocks the eye's movement,
but the eye can pass through an opening as small as 1
vinegar for the antipathy effect or a drop of honey for inch in diameter.
the sympathy effect)
Duration: 10 days ARCANE GATE
6th.level conjuration
This spell attracts or repels creatures of your choice.
Vou target something within range, either a Huge or Casting Time: 1 action
smaller object or creature or an area that is no larger Range: 500 feet
than a 200.foot cube. Then specify a kind of intelligent Components: V,S
creature, such as red dragons, goblins, or vampires. Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou invest the target with an aura that either attracts or
repels the specified creatures for the duration. Choose Vou create linked teleportation portais that remain open
antipathy or sympathy as the aura's effec!. for the duration. Choose two points on the graund that
you can see, one point within 10 feet ofyou and one
Antipathy. Thc cnchantmcnt causes creatures of the point within 500 feet of you. A circular portal, 10 feet
kind you designated to feel an intense urge to leave the in diameter, opens over each poin!. If the portal would
area and avoid the targe!. When such a creature can open in the space occupied by a creature, the spell fails,
see the target or comes within 60 feet of it, the creature and the casting is los!.
must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or become
frightened. The creature remains frightened while it can The portais are two.dimensional glowing rings
see the target or is within 60 feet of i!. While frightened filled with mist, hovering inches fram lhe ground and
by the target, the creature must use its movement to

211 PART 3 I SPELLS


perpendicular to it at the points you choose. A ring is At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
visible only from one side (your choice), which is the side spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, the damage increases by
that functions as a portal. Id6 for each slot leveI above 1st.

Any creature or object entering the portal exits from ASTRAL PROJECTION
the other portal as if the two were adjacent to each 9th-leveI necromancy
other; passing through a portal from the nonportal side
has no effect. The mist that fills each portal is opaque Casting Time: 1 hour
and blocks vision through it. On your turn, you can Range: 10 feet
rotate the rings as a bonus action so that the active side Components: V, S, M (for each creature you affect with
faces in a different direction.
this spell, you must provide one jacinth worth at least
ARCANE LOCK 1,000 gp and one ornately carved bar of silver worth
2nd-leveI abjuration at least 100 gp, ali of which the spell consumes)
Duration: Special
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch Vou and up to eight willing creatures within range
Components: V, S, M (gold dust worth at least 25 gp, project your astral bodies into the Astral Plane (the
spell fails and the casting is wasted ifyou are already
which the spell consumes) on that plane). The material body you leave behind is
Duration: Until dispelled unconscious and in a state of suspended animation; it
doesn't need food or air and doesn't age.
Vou touch a closed door, window, gate, chest, or other
entryway, and it becomes locked for the duration. Vou Your astral body resembles your mortal form in
and the creatures you designate when you cast this almost every way, replicating your game statistics and
spell can open the object normally. Vou can also set a possessions. The principal difference is the addition of
password that, when spoken within 5 feet of the object, a silvery cord that extends from between your shoulder
suppresses this spell for 1 minute. Otherwise, it is blades and trails behind you, fading to invisibility after
impassable until it is broken or the spell is dispelled or 1 fool. This cord is your tether to your material body. As
suppressed. Casting knock on the object suppresses long as the tether remains intact, you can find your way
arcane lock for 10 minutes. home. If the cord is cut-something that can happen
only when an effect specifically states that it does-your
While affected by this spell, the object is more difficult soul and body are separated, killing you instantly.
to break or force open; the DC to break it or pick any
locks on it increases by 10. Your astral form can freely travei through the Astral
Plane and can pass through portais there leading to any
ARMOR OF AGATHYS other plane. Ifyou enter a new plane or return to the
1st-leveI abjuration plane you were on when casting this spell, your body and
possessions are transported along the silver cord, allowing
Casting Time: 1 action you to re-enter your body as you ente r the new plane.
Range: Self Your astral form is a separate incarnation. Any damage
Components: V, S, M (a cup of water) or other effects that apply to it have no effect on your
Duration: 1 hour physical body, nor do they persist when you return to it.

A protective magical force surrounds you, manifesting The spell ends for you and your companions when
as a spectral frost that covers you and your gear. you use your action to dismiss il. When the spell ends,
Vou gain 5 temporary hit points for the duration. If a the affected creature returns to its physical body,
creature hits you with a melee attack while you have and it awakens.
these hit points, the creature takes 5 cold damage.
The spell might also end early for you or one of your
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a companions. A successful dispel magic spell used
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, both the temporary hit against an astral or physical body ends the spell for that
points and the cold damage increase by 5 for each slot creature. If a creature's original body or its astral form
leveI above 1st. drops to O hit points, the spell ends for that creature. If
the spell ends and the silver cord is intact, the cord pulls
AR MS OF HADAR the creature's astral form back to its body, ending its
1st-leveI conjuration state of suspended animation.

Casting Time: 1 action If you are returned to your body prematurely, your
Range: Self (lO-foot radius) companions remain in their astral forms and must find
Components: V, S their own way back to their bodies, usually by dropping
Duration: Instantaneous to O hit points.

Vou invoke the power of Hadar, the Dark Hunger. AUGURY
Tendrils of dark energy erupt from you and batter ali 2nd-levei divination (ritual)
creatures within 10 feet of you. Each creature in that
area must make a Strength saving throw. On a failed Casting Time: 1 minute
save, a target takes 2d6 necrotic damage and can't take Range: Sei f
reactions until its next turno On a successful save, the Components: V, S, M (specially marked sticks, bones,
creature takes half damage, but suffers no other effect.
or similar tokens worth at least 25 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous 215

PART 3 SPELLS


By casting gem-inlaid sticks, rolling dragon bones, AWAKEN J
laying out ornate cards, or employing some other 5th-leveI transmutation
divining tool, you receive an omen from an otherworldly I
entity about the results of a specific course of action that Casting Time: 8 hours
you plan to take within the next 30 minutes, The DM Range: Touch
chooses from the following possible omens: Components: V, S, M (an agate worth at least 1,000 gp,

Weal, for good results which the spell consumes)
Woe, for bad results Duration: Instantaneous
Weal and woe, for both good and bad results
Nothing, for results that aren't especially good or bad After spending the casting time tracing magical
pathways within a precious gemstone, you touch a Huge
The spell doesn't take into account any possible or smaller beast or plant. The target must have either
circumstances that might change the outcome, such no Intelligence score or an Intelligence of 3 or less. The
as the casting of additional spells or the loss or gain target gains an Intelligence of 10. The target also gains
of a companion. the ability to speak one language you know. ]f the target
is a plant, it gains the ability to move its Iimbs, roots,
If you cast the spell two or more times before vines, creepers, and so forth, and it gains senses similar
completing your next long rest, there is a cumulative 25 to a human's. Your DM chooses statistics appropriate
percent chance for each casting after the first that you for the awakened plant, such as the statistics for the
get a random reading. The DM makes this roll in secret. awakened shrub or the awakened tree.

AURA OF LIFE The awakened beast or plant is charmed by you for
4th-leveI abjuration 30 days or until you or your companions do anything
harmful to it. When the charmed condition ends,
Casting Time: I action the awakened creature chooses whether to remain
Range: Self (30-foot radius) friendly to you, based on how you treated it while
Components: V it was charmed.
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
BANE
Life-preserving energy radiates from you in an aura with 1st-leveI enchantment
a 30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves
with you, centered on you. Each nonhostile creature Casting Time: 1 action
in the aura (including you) has resistance to necrotic Range: 30 feet
damage, and its hit point maximum can't be reduced. In Components: V, S, M (a drop of blood)
addition, a nonhostile, living creature regains I hit point Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
when it starts its turn in the aura with O hit points.
Up to three creatures of your choice that you can see
AURA OF PURITY within range must make Charisma saving throws.
4th-leveI abjuration Whenever a target that fails this saving throw makes
an attack roll or a saving throw before the spell ends,
Casting Time: I action the target must roll a d4 and subtract the number rolled
Range: Sei f (30-foot radius) from the attack roll or saving throw.
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, you can target one
Purifying energy radiates from you in an aura with a additional creature for each slot leveI above 1st.
30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves
with you, centered on you. Each nonhostile creature BANISHING SMITE
in the aura (including you) can't become diseased, 5th-leveI abjuration
has resistance to poison damage, and has advantage
on saving throws against effects that cause any of the Casting Time: 1 bonus action
following conditions: blinded, charmed, deafened, Range: Self
frightened, paralyzed, poisoned, and stunned. Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
AURA OF VITALITY
3rd-level evocation The next time you hit a creature with a weapon attack
before this spell ends, your weapon crackles with force,
Casting Time: I action and the attack deals an extra 5dlO force damage to the
Range: Self (30-foot radius) target. Additionally, if this attack reduces the target
Components: V to 50 hit points or fewer, you banish it. If the target is
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute native to a different plane of existence than the one
you're on, the target disappears, returning to its home
Healing energy radiates from you in an aura with a plane. ]f the target is native to the plane you're on, the
30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves with creature vanishes into a harmless demiplane. While
you, centered on you. Vou can use a bonus action to there, the target is incapacitated. It remains there until
cause one creature in the aura (including you) to regain the spell ends, at which point the target reappears in the
2d6 hit points. space it left or in the nearest unoccupied space if that
space is occupied.

216 PART 3 I SPEI.LS


BANISHMENT
4th-level abjuration

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5, M (an item distastefuI to the target)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

Vou attempt to send one creature that you can see ,
within range to another plane of existence. The
target must succeed on a Charisma saving throw
ar be banished.

1f the target is native to the plane of existence you're
on, you banish the target to a harmless demiplane.
While there, the target is incapacitated. The target
remains there until the spel1 ends, at which point the
target reappears in the space it left ar in the nearest
unoccupied space if that space is occupied.

1fthe target is native to a different plane of existence
than the one you're on, the target is banished with
a faint popping noise, returning to its home plane.
]f the spel1 ends before 1 minute has passed, the
target reappears in the space it left ar in the nearest
unoccupied space if that space is occupied. Otherwise,
the target doesn't returno

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spel1 using
a spel1 slot of 5th levei ar higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot levei above 4th.

BARKSKIN
2nd-level transmutation

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a handfuI of oak bark)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour

Vou touch a willing creature. Until the spel1 ends, the
target's skin has a rough, bark-like appearance, and the
target's AC can't be less than 16, regardless ofwhat kind
of armar it is wearing.

BEACON OF HOPE
3rd-level abjuration

Casting Time: 1 action up to 1 minute
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration,

This spel1 bestows hope and vitality. Choose any
number of creatures within range. For the duration,
each target has advantage on Wisdom saving throws
and death saving throws, and regains the maximum
number of hit points possible from any healing.

BEAST SENSE
2nd-level divination (ritual)

Casting Time: 1 action up to 1 hour
Range: Touch
Components: 5
Duration: Concentration,

Vou touch a willing beast. For the duration of the speIl,
you can use your action to see through the beast's eyes
and hear what it hears, and continue to do so until
you use your action to return to your normal senses.


While perceiving through the beast's senses, you gain the hand using your game statistics. On a hit, the target
the benefits of any special senses possessed by that takes 4d8 force damage.
creature, though you are blinded and deafened to your
own surroundings, Forceful Hand. The hand attempts to push a creature
within 5 feet of it in a direction you choose. Make
BESTOW CURSE a check with the hand's Strength contested by the
Strength (Athletics) check of the target. lf the target is
3rd-/evel nccromancy Medium or smaller, you have advantage on the check. lf
you succeed, the hand pushes the target up to 5 feet plus
Casting Time: 1 action a number of feet equal to five times your spellcasting
Range: Touch ability modifier. The hand moves with the target to
Components: V,S remain within 5 feet of it.
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Grasping Hand. The hand attempts to grapple a Huge
You louch a creature, and that creature must succeed or smaller creature within 5 feet of it. You use the hand's
on a Wisdom saving throw or become cursed for the Strength score to resolve the grapple. If the target is
duration of the spelL When you cast this spell, choose Medium or smaller, you have advantage on the check.
the nature of the curse from the following options: While the hand is grappling the target, you can use a
bonus action to have the hand crush it. When you do
Choose one ability score. While cursed, the target so, the target takes bludgeoning damage equal to 2d6 +
has disadvantage on ability checks and saving throws your spellcasting ability modifier.
made with that ability score.
While cursed, the target has disadvantage on attack lnterposing Hand. The hand interposes itself
rolls against you. between you and a creature you choose until you give
While cursed, the target must make a Wisdom sav- the hand a different command. The hand moves to stay
ing throw at the start of each of its turns. lf it fails, it between you and the target, providing you with half
wastes its action that turn doing nothing. cover against the target. The target can't move through
While the target is cursed, your attacks and spells the hand's space if its Strength score is less than or
deal an extra ld8 necrotic damage to the target. equal to the hand's Strength score. If its Strength score
is higher than the hand's Strength score, the target can
A remove curse spell ends this effect. At the DM's move toward you through the hand's space, but that
option, you may choose an alternative curse effect, but space is difficuIt terrain for the target.
it should be no more powerful than those described
above. The DM has final say on such a curse's effect. At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the damage from the
At Higher LeveIs. If you cast this spell using a spell clenched fist option increases by 2d8 and the damage
slot of 4th levei or higher, the duration is concentration, from the grasping hand increases by 2d6 for each slot
up to 10 minutes. If you use a spell slot of 5th levei or leveI above 5th.
higher, the duration is 8 hours. If you use a spell slot of
7th level or higher, the duration is 24 hours. If you use BLADE BARRIER
a 9th levei spell slot, the spelllasts until it is dispelled.
Using a spell slot of 5th levei or higher grants a duration 6th-levei evocation
that doesn't require concentration.
Casting Time: 1 action
BIGBY'S HAND Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S
5th-leveI evocation Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes

Casting Time: 1 action You create a vertical wall of whirling, razor-sharp blades
Range: 120 feet made of magical energy. The wall appears within range
Components: V,S, M (an eggshell and a and lasts for the duration. You can make a straight wall
up to 100 feet long, 20 feet high, and 5 feet thick, or a
snakeskin glove) ringed wall up to 60 feet in diameter, 20 feet high, and
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute 5 feet thick. The wall provides three-quarters cover to
creatures behind it, and its space is difficult terrain.
You create a Large hand of shimmering, translucent
force in an unoccupied space that you can see within When a creature enters the wall's area for the first
range. The hand lasts for the spell's duration, and it time on a turn or starts its turn there, the creature must
moves at your command, mimicking the movements of make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save. the
your own hand. creature takes 6d1O slashing damage. On a successful
save, the creature takes half as much damage.
The hand is an object that has AC 20 and hit points
equal to your hit point maximum. lf it drops to Ohit BLADE WARD
points, the spell ends. It has a Strength of 26 (+8) and a
Dexterity of 10 (+0). The hand doesn't fill its spaee. Abjuratian cantrip

When you cast the spell and as a bonus action on your Casting Time: 1 action
subsequent turns, you can move the hand up to 60 feet Range: Self
and then cause one of the following effects with it. Components: V,S
Duration: 1 round
Clenched Fist. The hand strikes one creature or
object within 5 feet of it. Make a melee spell attack for

PART 3 I S PELLS

218


Vou extend your hand and trace a sigi! ofwarding in the BLINDNESS/DEAFNESS
air. Unti! the end of your next turo. you have resistance 2nd.level necromancy
against bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage
dealt by weapon attacks. Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
BLESS Components: V
ls~levelenchantment Duration: 1 minute

Casting Time: 1 action Vou can blind or deafen a foe. Choose one creature that
Range: 30 feet you can see within range to make a Constitution saving
Components: V,S, M (a sprinkling of holy water) throw. If it fails, the target is either blinded or deafened
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute (your choice) for the duration. At the end of each of its
turos, the target can make a Constitution saving throw.
Vou bless up to three creatures of your choice within On a success, the spell ends.
range. Whenever a target makes an attack roll or a
saving throw before the spell ends, the target can roll At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a d4 and add the number rolled to the attack roll or a spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, you can target one
saving throw. additional creature for each slot levei above 2nd.

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using BLINK
a spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, you can target one 3rd.level transmutation
additional creature for each slot levei above 1st.
Casting Time: 1 action
BLIGHT Range: Self
4th.level necromancy Components: V,S
Duration: 1 minute
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet Roll a d20 at the end of each of your turos for the
Components: V,S duration of the spell. On a roll of 11 or higher, you
Duration: Instantaneous vanish from your current plane of existence and appear
in the Ethereal Plane (the spell fails and the casting is
Necromantic energy washes over a creature of your wasted if you were already on that plane). At the start of
choice that you can see within range, draining moisture your next turo, and when the spell ends if you are on the
and vitality from it. The target must make a Constitution Ethereal Plane, you returo to an unoccupied space of
saving throw. The target takes 8d8 necrotic damage on your choice that you can see within 10 feet of the space
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful you vanished from. lf no unoccupied space is available
one. This spell has no effect on undead or constructs. within that range, you appear in the nearest unoccupied
space (chosen at random if more than one space is
lf you target a plant creature or a magical plant, it equally near). Vou can dismiss this spell as an action.
makes the saving throw with disadvantage, and the spell
deals maximum damage to it. While on the Ethereal Plane, you can see and hear
the plane you originated from, which is cast in shades
lfyou target a nonmagical plant that isn't a creature, of gray, and you can't see anything there more than 60
such as a tree or shrub, it doesn't make a saving throw; feet away. Vou can only affect and be affected by other
it simply withers and dies. creatures on the Ethereal Plane. Creatures that aren't
there can't perceive you or interact with you, unless they
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a have the ability to do sO.
spell slot of 5th levei or higher, the damage increases by
Id8 for each slot leveI above 4th. BLUR
2nd./evel illusion
BLINDING SMITE
3rd.level evocation Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Casting Time: 1 bonus action Components: V
Range: Self Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Your body becomes blurred, shifting and wavering to
all who can see YOUF. or the duration, any creature has
The next time you hit a creature with a melee weapon disadvantage on attack rolls against you. An attacker
attack during this spell's duration, your weapon flares is immune to this effect if it doesn't rely on sight,
with bright light, and the attack deals an extra 3d8 as with blindsight, or can see through illusions, as
radiant damage to the target. Additionally, the target with truesight.
must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or be
blinded unti! the spell ends. BRANDING SMITE
2nd.level evocation
A creature blinded by this spell makes another
Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turns. Casting Time: 1 bonus action
On a successful save, it is no longer blinded. Range: Self

PART 3 I SPELLS 219


Components: V
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule

The nexl lime you hil a crealure wilh a weapon attack
before lhis spell ends, lhe weapon gleams wilh aslral
radiance as you slrike, The attack deals an exlra 2d6
radianl damage lo lhe largel, which becomes visible if
il's invisibie, and lhe largel sheds dim lighl in a 5.fool
radius and can'l become invisible unlil lhe spell ends.

At Higher Leve/s. When you casl lhis spell using
a spell slol of 3rd levei or higher, lhe exlra damage
increases by ld6 for each sI01 levei above 2nd.

BURNING HANDS
1st.leveI evocation

Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: Self (15-foot cone)
Components: V, S
Duration: Inslanlaneous

As you hold your hands wilh lhumbs louching and
fingers spread, a lhin sheel of flames shools forlh from
your outslretched fingerlips. Each crealure in a 15-fool
cone musl make a Dexlerily saving lhrow. A crealure
lakes 3d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.

The fire ignites any flammable objecls in lhe area lhal
aren'l being woro or carried.

At Higher Leve/s. When you casl lhis spell using a
spell slol of 2nd levei or higher, lhe damage increases by
ld6 for each slol levei above 1st.

CALL LIGHTNING
3rd-IeveI conjuration

Casting Time: 1 aclion up lo 10 minutes
Range: 120 feel
Components: V, S
Duration: Concenlralion,

A slorm cloud appears in the shape of a cylinder lhal
is 10 feet lall wilh a 60.fool radius, cenlered on a poinl
you can see 100 feel direclly above you. The spell fails
if you can'l see a poinl in lhe air where lhe slorm cloud
could appear (for example, if you are in a room lhal can't
accommodale lhe cloud).

When you casl lhe spell, choose a poinl you can see
wilhin range. AbolI of lightning flashes down from lhe
cloud lOlhal point. Each crealure wilhin 5 feel of lhal
point musl make a Dexlerily saving throw. A crealure
lakes 3d 10 lighlning damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one. On each of your
luros unlil lhe spell ends, you can use your aclion lo call
down lighlning in lhis way again, largeting lhe same
poinl or a different one.

lfyou are ouldoors in slormy condilions when you
casl lhis spell, lhe spell gives you control over lhe
exisling slorm inslead of creating a new ooe. Under
such condilions, lhe spell's damage increases by ld 10.

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast lhis spell using a
spell si01of 41h or higher levei, lhe damage increases by
IdlO for each si01 levei above 3rd.


CALM EMOTIONS additional creature for each slot levei above 1sI. The
2nd.level enehantment creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when
you target them.
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet CHILL TOUCH
Components: V.S Neeromaneyeantrip
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 minute
Casting Time: 1 action
Vou attempt to suppress strong emotions in a group Range: 120 feet
of people. Eaeh humanoid in a 20-foot.radius sphere Components: V,S
eentered on a point you choose within range must make Duration: 1 round
a Charisma saving throw; a creature can choose to
fail this saving throw if it wishes. [f a creature fails its Vou create a ghostly. skeletal hand in the space of a
saving throw. choose one of the following two effects. creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack
against the creature to assail it with the chill of the
Vou can suppress any effect causing a target to be grave. On a hit. the target takes ld8 necrotic damage.
charmed or frightened. When this spell ends. any and it can't regain hit points until the start of your next
suppressed effeet resumes. provided that its duration turno Until then, the hand clings to the target.
has not expired in the meantime.
Ifyou hit an undead target. it also has disadvantage on
Alternatively. you can make a target indifferent about attack rolls against you until the end of your next turno
ereatures of your ehoice that it is hostile toward. This
indifference ends if the target is attaeked or harmed by This spell's damage increases by ld8 when you reach
a spell or if it witnesses any of its friends being harmed. 5th levei (2d8). 11th leveI (3d8), and 17th levei (4d8).
When the spell ends. the creature becomes hostile
again. unless the DM rules otherwise. CHROMATIC ORB
1st.level evoeation
CHAIN LIGHTNING
6th.level evoeation Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Casting Time: 1 action Components: V, S. M (a diamond worth at least 50 gp)
Range: 150 feet Duration: Instantaneous
Components: V.S. M (a bit of fur; a piece of amber.
Vou hurl a 4-ineh-diameter sphere of energy at a
glass. or a crystal rod; and three silver pins) creature that you can see within range. Vou choose
Duration: Instantaneous acid, cold. tire, lightning, poison, or thunder for the type
of orb you create. and then make a ranged spell attack
Vou create a bolt of lightning that ares toward a target of against the target. lf the attack hits. the creature takes
your choice that you can see within range. Three bolts 3d8 damage of the type you ehose.
then leap from that target to as many as three other
targets. each of which must be within 30 feet of the tirst At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
target. A target can be a creature or an objeet and ean spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher. the damage inereases by
be targeted by only one of the bolts. ld8 for each slot levei above 1st.

A target must make a Dexterity saving throw. The CIRCLE OF DEATH
target takes lOd8 lightning damage on a failed save. or 6th-levei neeromaney
half as much damage on a successful one.
Casting Time: 1 aetion
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using Range: 150 feet
a spell slot of 7th levei or higher. one additional bolt Components: V, S. M (the powder of a erushed black
leaps from the tirst target to another target for each slot
levei above 6th. pearl worth at least 500 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
CHARM PERSON
lst.level enehantment A sphere of nega tive energy ripples out in a 60.foot-
radius sphere from a point within range. Eaeh creature
Casting Time: 1 action in that area must make a Constitution saving throw. A
Range: 30 feet target takes 8d6 necrotie damage on a failed save. or
Components: V, S half as much damage on a successful one.
Duration: 1 hour
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
Vou attempt to eharm a humanoid you can see within spell slot of 7th leveI or higher. the damage increases by
range. It must make a Wisdom saving throw. and does 2d6 for each slot levei above 6th.
so with advantage if you or your companions are tighting
it. [f it fails the saving throw. it is charmed by you until CIRCLE OF POWER
the spell ends or until you or your companions do 5th-levei abjuration
anything harmful to it. The charmed ereature regards
you as a friendly acquaintance. When the spell ends. the Casting Time: 1 action
creature knows it was eharmed by you. Range: Self (30-foot radius)
Components: V
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using Duration: Concentration. up to 10 minutes
a spell slot of 2nd levei or higher. you can target one

PART 3 SP£LLS

221


Divine energy radiates from you, distorting and CLOUD OF DAGGERS
diffusing magical energy within 30 feet of you. Until 2nd-levei conjuration
the spell ends, the sphere moves with you, centered on
you. For the duration, each friendly creature in the area Casting Time: 1 action
(including you) has advantage on saving throws against Range: 60 feet
spells and other magical effects. Additionally, when Components: V, 5, M (a sliver of glass)
an affected creature succeeds on a saving throw made Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
against a spell ar magical effect that allows it to make a
saving throw to take only half damage, it instead takes Vou fill the air with spinning daggers in a cube 5 feet on
no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw. each side, centered on a point you choose within range.
A creature takes 4d4 slashing damage when it enters
CLAIRVOYANCE the spell's area for the first time on a turn ar starts
3rd-/evel divination its turn there.

Casting Time: 10 minutes At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
Range: 1 mile spell slot of 3rd levei ar higher, the damage increases by
Components: V,5, M (a focus worth at least 100 2d4 for each slot levei above 2nd.

gp, either a jeweled horn for hearing ar a glass CLOUDKILL
eye for seeing) 5th-levei conjuration
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Casting Time: I action
Vou create an invisible sensor within range in a location Range: 120 feet
familiar to you (a place you have visited ar seen before) Components: V,5
ar in an obvious location that is unfamiliar to you (such Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
as behind a doar, around a corner, ar in a grove of trees).
The senso r remains in place for the duration, and it Vou create a 20-foot-radius sphere of poisonous, yellow-
can't be attacked ar otherwise interacted with. green fog centered on a point you choose within range.
The fog spreads around corners. lt lasts for the duration
When you cast the spell, you choose seeing ar ar until strong wind disperses the fog, ending the spell.
hearing. Vou can use the chosen sense through the lts area is heavily obscured.
senso r as if you were in its space. As your action, you
can switch between seeing and hearing. When a creature enters the spell's area for the first
time on a turn ar starts its turn there, that creature must
A creature that can see the sensor (such as a creature make a Constitution saving throw. The creature takes
benefiting from see invisibility ar truesight) sees a 5d8 poison damage on a failed save, ar half as much
luminous, intangible orb about the size of your fist. damage on a successful one, Creatures are affected
even if they hold their breath ar don't need to breathe.
CLONE
8th-levei necromancy The fog moves 10 feet away from you at the start
of each of your turns, rolling along the surface of the
Casting Time: 1 hour ground. The vapors, being heavier than air, sink to the
Range: Touch lowest levei of the land, even pouring down openings.
Components: V, 5, M (a diamond worth at least 1,000
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
gp and at least I cubic inch of flesh of the creature spell slot of 6th level ar higher, the damage increases by
that is to be cloned, which the spell consumes, and a ld8 for each slot levei above 5th.
vessel worth at least 2,000 gp that has a sealable lid
and is large enough to hold a Medium creature, such COLOR SPRAY
as a huge urn, coffin, mud-filled cyst in the ground, ar I st-/eveJ iIIusion
crystal container filled with salt water)
Duration: !nstantaneous Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf (15-foot cone)
This spell grows an inert duplicate of a living creature Components: V,5, M (a pinch of powder or sand that is
as a safeguard against death. This clone forms inside
a sealed vessel and grows to full size and maturity colored red, yellow, and blue)
after 120 days; you can also choose to have the clone Duration: I round
be a younger version of the same creature. lt remains
inert and endures indefinitely, as long as its vessel A dazzling array of flashing, colored light springs from
remains undisturbed. your hand. Roll 6dlO; the total is how many hit points
of creatures this spell can effect. Creatures in a 15-foot
At any time after the clone matures, if the original cone originating from you are affected in ascending
creature dies, its soul transfers to the clone, provided arder of their current hit points (ignoring unconscious
that the soul is free and willing to returno The clone is creatures and creatures that can't see).
physically identical to the original and has the same
personality, memories, and abilities, but nane of the 5tarting with the creature that has the lowest current
original's equipment. The original creature's physical hit points, each creature affected by this spell is blinded
remains, if they still exist, become inert and can't until the spell ends, 5ubtract each creature's hit points
thereafter be restored to life, since the creature's sou I from the total before moving on to the creature with
is elsewhere. the next lowest hit points. A creature's hit points must
be equal to or less than the remaining total for that
creature to be affected,

222 PART 3 I SPELLS


At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, roll an additional 2d IO
for each slot leveI above 1st.

COMMAND
/st-/evel enchantment

Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: 1 round

Vou speak a one-word command to a creature you can
see within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom
saving throw or follow the command on its next turno
The spell has no effect if the target is undead, if it
doesn't understand your language, or if your command
is directly harmful to it.

Some typical commands and their effects follow. Vou
might issue a command other than one described here.
If you do so, the OM determines how the target behaves.
If the target can't follow your command, the spell ends.

Approach. The target moves toward you by the
shortest and most direct route, ending its turn if it
moves within 5 feet of YOU.

Drop. The target drops whatever it is holding and then
ends its turno

F/ee. The target spends its turn moving away from
you by the fastest available means.

Grove/. The target falls prone and then ends its turno
Ha/t. The target doesn't move and takes no actions.
A fiying creature stays aloft, provided that it is able to
do sO. If it must move to stay aloft, it fiies the minimum
distance needed to remain in the air.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, you can affeet one
additional creature for each slot level above 1st. The
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when
you target them.

COMMUNE
5th-levei divination (ritual)

Casting Time: 1 minute
Range:SeIf
Components: V, S, M (incense and aviaI of holy or

unholy water)
Duration: 1 minute

Vou contact your deity or a divine proxy and ask up to
three questions that can be answered with a yes or no.
Vou must ask your questions before the spell ends. Vou
receive a correct answer for each questiono

Oivine beings aren't necessarily omniscient, so you
might receive "unclear" as an answer if a question
pertains to information that lies beyond the deity's
knowledge. In a case where a one-word answer could be
misleading or contrary to the deity's interests, the OM
might offer a short phrase as an answer instead.

Ifyou cast the spell two or more times before finishing
your next long rest, there is a cumulative 25 percent
chance for each casting after the first that you get no
answer. The OM makes this roll in secret.


COMMUNE WITH NATURE This speIl doesn't decode secret messages in a text
5th-levei divination (ritual) or a glyph, such as an arcane sigil, that isn't part of a
written language.
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 5elf COMPULSION
Components: V, 5 4th-levei enchantment
Duration: Instantaneous
Casting Time: 1 action up to I minute
Vou briefty become one with nature and gain knowledge Range: 30 feet
of the surrounding territory. In the outdoors, the spell Components: V, 5
gives you knowledge of the land within 3 miles of you. Duration: Concentration,
In caves and other natural underground settings, the
radius is Iimited to 300 feet. The spell doesn't function Creatures of your choice that you can see within range
where nature has been replaced by construction, such and that can hear you must make a Wisdom saving
as in dungeons and towns. throw. A target automatically succeeds on this saving
throw if it can't be charmed. On a failed save, a target
Vou instantly gain knowledge of up to three facts of is affected by this spelI. Until the speIl ends, you can
your choice about any of the following subjects as they use a bonus action on each of your turns to designate a
relate to the area: direction that is horizontal to YOU. Each affected target
must use as much of its movement as possible to move
terrain and bodies of water in that direction on its next turno It can take its action
prevalent plants, minerais, animais, or peoples before it moves. After moving in this way, it can make
powerful celestiaIs, fey, fiends, elementals, or undead another Wisdom saving to try to end the effect.
influence from other planes of existence
buildings A target isn't compeIled to move into an obviously
deadly hazard, such as a fire or pit, but it will provoke
For example, you could determine the location of opportunity attacks to move in the designated direction.
powerful undead in the area, the location of major
sources of safe drinking water, and the location of any CONE OF COLD
nearby towns. 5th-levei evocation

COMPELLED DUEL Casting Time: I action
1st-levei enchantment Range: 5elf (60-foot cone)
Components: V, 5, M (a small crystal or glass cone)
Casting Time: I bonus act ion Duration: Instantaneous
Range: 30 feet
Components: V A blast of cold air erupts from your hands. Each
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute creature in a 60-foot cone must make a Constitution
saving throw. A creature takes 8d8 cold damage on a
Vou attempt to compel a creature into a dueI. One failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
creature that you can see within range must make a
Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is A creature killed by this spell becomes a frozen statue
drawn to you, compelled by your divine demando For until it thaws.
the duration, it has disadvantage on attack rolls against
creatures other than you, and must make a Wisdom At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this speIl using a
saving throw each time it attempts to move to a space spell slot of 6th level or higher, the damage increases by
that is more than 30 feet away from you; if it succeeds ld8 for each slot leveI above 5th.
on this saving throw, this spell doesn't restrict the
target's movement for that turno CONFUSION
4th-levei enchantment
The spell ends if you attack any other creature, if you
cast a spell that targets a hostile creature other than the Casting Time: 1 action
target, if a creature friendly to you damages the target or Range: 90 feet
casts a harmful spell on it, or ifyou end your turn more Components: V, 5, M (three nut shells)
than 30 feet away from the target. Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

COMPREHEND LANGUAGES This spell assaults and twists creatures' minds,
1st-levei divination (ritual) spawning delusions and provoking uncontrolled action.
Each creature in a lO-foot-radius sphere centered on
Casting Time: 1 action a point you choose within range must succeed on a
Range: 5elf Wisdom saving throw when you cast this spell or be
Components: V, 5, M (a pinch of soot and salt) affected by it.
Duration: 1 hour
An affected target can't take reactions and must roIl
For the duration, you understand the literal meaning of adIO at the start of each of its turns to determine its
any spoken language that you hear. Vou also understand behavior for that turno
any written language that you see, but you must be
touching the surface on which the words are written. It
takes about I minute to read one page of text.

PAR1 3 I SPELLS

224


dl0 Behavior of identical weapons that shoot forward and then
1 The creature uses ali its movement to move in a disappear. Each creature in a 60.foot cone must succeed
random direction. To determine the direction, reli on a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 3d8
a d8 and assign a direction to each die face. The damage on a failed save, ar half as much damage on a
creature doesn't take an action this turno successful one. The damage type is the same as that of
the weapon or ammunition used as a component.
2-6 The creature doesn't move or take actions this turno
7-8 The creature uses its action to make a melee attack CONJURE CELESTIAL

against a randomly determined creature within its 7th-levei conjuration
reach. If there is no creature within its reach, the
creature does nothing this turno Casting Time: I minute
9-10 The creature can act and move normally. Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour

At the end of each of its turns, an affected target can Vou summon a celestial of challenge rating 4 or lower,
make a Wisdom saving throw. lf it succeeds. this effect which appears in an unoccupied space that you can see
ends for that target. within range. The celestial disappears when it drops to
O hit points or when the spell ends.
At Higher LeveIs. When you casl this spell using a
spell slot of 5th levei or higher. the radius of the sphere The celestial is friendly to you and your companions
increases by 5 reet for each slot levei above 4th. for the duration. Roll initiative for the celestial, which
has its own turns. It obeys any verbal commands that
CONJURE ANIMALS you issue to it (no action required by you), as long as
they don't violate its alignment. If you don't issue any
3rd-/evel eonjuratioll commands to the celestial, it defends itself from hostile
creatures but otherwise takes no actions.
Casting Time: 1 action up lo 1 hour
Range: 60 feet The DM has the celestial's statistics.
Components: V, S At Higher LeveIs. When you cast [his spell using a
Duration: Concenlration, 9th-levei spell slot, you summon a celestial of challenge
rating 5 ar lower.
Vou summon fey spirits lhal take the form of beasts and
appear in unoccupied spaces that you can see within CONJURE ELEMENTAL
range. Choose one of the following options for what
appears: 5th-levei cOlljuration

One beast of challenge rating 2 or lower Casting Time: 1 minute
Two beasts of challenge rating 1 ar lower Range: 90 feet
Four beasts of challenge rating 1/2 or lower Components: V, S, M (burning incense for air, soft day
Eight beasts of ehallenge rating 1/4 ar lower
for earth, sulfur and phosphorus for fire, or water and
Each beasl is also considered fey, and it disappears sand for water)
when it drops to O hit points or when the spell ends. Duration: Concentration, up to I hour

The summoned creatures are friendly to you and your Vou call forth an elemental servant. Choose an area of air,
companions. Roll initiative for the summoned creatures earth, !ire, or water that fills a lO-foot cube within range.
as a group, which has its own turns. They obey any An elemental of challenge rating 5 or lower appropriate
verbal commands that you issue to them (no action to the area you chose appears in an unoccupied space
required by you). If you don't issue any commands to within 10 feet of it. For example, a !ire elemental
them, they defend themselves from hostile creatures, emerges from a bonfire, and an earth elemental rises
but otherwise take no actions. up fram the ground. The elemental disappears when it
drops to O hit points or when the spell ends.
The DM has the creatures' statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using The elemental is friendly to you and your companions
certain higher-Ievel spell slots, you choose one of the for the duration. Roll initiative for the elemental, which
summoning options above, and more creatures appear: has its own turns. lt obeys any verbal commands that
twice as many with a 5th-levei slot, three times as many you issue to it (no action required by you). If you don't
with a 7th-levei slot. and four times as many with a issue any commands to the elemental, it defends itself
9th-levei si 01. from hostile creatures but otherwise takes no actions.

CONJURE BARRAGE Ifyour concentration is broken, the elemental doesn't
disappear. Instead, you lose control of the elemental,
3rd-/evel conjuration il becomes hostile toward you and your companions,
and it might attack. An uncontrolled elemental can't
Casting Time: 1 action or a be dismissed by you, and it disappears I hour after
Range: Sei f (60-foot cone) you summoned it.
Components: V, S, M (one piece of ammunition
The DM has the elemental's statistics.
thrown weapon) At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
Duration: Instantaneous a spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the challenge rating
increases by I for each slot levei above 5th.
Vou throw a nonmagical weapon or fire a piece of
nonmagicaI ammunition into the air to create a cone

PART 3 I SPELLS


CONJURE FEY CONJURE VOLLEY

6th-levei conjuration 5th-levei conjumtion

Casting Time: 1 minute up to 1 hour Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S Components: V, S, M (one piece of ammunition or one
Duration: Concentration,
thrown weapon)
Vou summon a fey creatllre of challenge rating 6 or Duration: Instantaneous
lower, or a fey spirit that takes the form of a beast of
challenge rating 6 or lower. lt appears in an unoccupied Vou fire a piece of nonmagical ammunition fram a
space that you can see within range, The fey creature ranged weapon or throw a nonmagical weapon into
disappears when it drops to O hit points or when the air and choose a point within range. Hundreds of
the spell ends, duplicates of the ammunition or weapon fali in a volley
from above and then disappear. Each creature in a
The fey creature is friendly to you and your 40-foot-radius. 20.foot.high cylinder centered on that
companions for the duration. Roll initiative for the point must make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature
creature, which has its own turns. lt obeys any verhal takes 8d8 damage on a failed save. or half as much
commands that you isslle to it (no action required damage on a successful one. The damage type is the
by you), as long as they don't violate its alignment. If same as that of the ammunition or weapon.
you don't issue any commands to the fey creature, it
defends itselffrom hostile creatures but otherwise CONJURE WOODLAND BEINGS
takes no actions.
4th.level conjuration
Ifyour concentration is broken, the fey creature
doesn't disappear. Instead, you lose contro! of the Casting Time: 1 action
fey creature, it hecomes hostile toward you and your Range: 60 feet
companions, and it might attack. An uncontrolled fey Components: V. S, M (one holly berry per
creature can't be dismissed hy you. and it disappears 1
hour after you summoned it. creature summoned)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
The DM has the fey creature's statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using Vou summon fey creatures that appear in unoccupied
a spell slot of 7th leveI or higher, the challenge rating spaces that you can see within range, Choose one of the
increases by 1 for each slot levei above 6th. following options for what appears:

CONJURE MINOR ELEMENTALS One fey creature of challenge rating 2 or lower
Two fey creatures of challenge rating 1 or lower
4th.level conjuration Four fey creatures of challenge rating 1/2 or lower
Eight fey creatures of challenge rating 1/4 or lower
Casting Time: 1 minute up to I hour
Range: 90 feet A summoned creature disappears when it drops to O hit
Components: V. S points or when the spell ends.
Duration: Concentration,
The summoned creatures are friend!y to you and your
Vou summon elementals that appear in IInoccupied companions. Roll initiative for the summoned creatures
spaces that you can see within range. Vou choose one as a group. which have their own turns. They obey any
the following options for what appears: verhal commands that you issue to them (no action
required hy you). If you don't issue any commands to
One elemental of challenge rating 2 or lower them, they elefend themselves from hostile creatures,
Two elementals of challenge rating 1 or lower but otherwise take no actions.
Four elementals of challenge rating 1/2 or lower
Eight elementals of challenge rating 1/4 or lower. The DM has the creatures' statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
An elemental summoned by this spell disappears when certain higher.level spell slots. you choose one of the
it drops to O hit points or when the spell ends. summoning options above, anel more creatures appear:
twice as many with a 6th.level slot and three times as
The summoned creatures are friendly to you and your many with an 8th.level slot.
companions. Roll initiative for the summoned creatures
as a group. which has its own turns. They obey any CONTACT OTHER PLANE
verbal commands that you issue to them (no action
required by you). If you don't issue any commands to 5th.level divination (ritual)
them, they defend themselves from hostile creatures,
Casting Time: 1 minute
hut otherwise take no actions. Range: Self
Components: V
The DM has the creatures' statistics. Duration: 1 minute
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
certain higher.level spell slots, you choose one of the Vou mentally contact a demigod, the spirit of a long.dead
summoning options above, and more creatures appear: sage, or some other mysterious entity fram another
twice as many with a 6th-levei slot and three times as plane. Contacting this extraplanar intelligence can
many with an 8th-levei slot. strain or even break your mind. When you cast this
spell, make a DC 15 lntelligence saving thraw. On a

226 PA RT 3 I SPEl.LS


failure, you take 6d6 psychic damage and are insane Components: V, S, M (a statuetle of yourself carved
until you finish a long rest. While insane, you can't take from ivory and decorated with gems worth at
actions, can't understand what other creatures say, can't least 1,500 gp)
read, and speak only in gibberish, A greater restoration
spell cast on you ends this effect. Duration: 10 days

On a successful save, you can ask the entity up to five Choose a spell of 5th levei or lower that you can cast, that
questions, Vou must ask your questions before the spell has a casting time of 1 action, and that can target YOU.
ends, The DM answers each question with one word, Vou cast that spell-called the contingent spell-as part
such as uyes," "no," "maybe," "never/' "irrelevant." ar of casting contingency, expending spell slots for both, but
"unclear" (if the entity doesn't know the answer to the the contingent spell doesn't come into effect. Instead, it
question), ]f a one-word answer would be misleading, takes effect when a certain circumstance occurs. Vou
the DM might instead offer a short phrase as an answer, describe that circumstance when you cast the two spells.
For example, a contingency cast with water breathing
CONTAGION might stipulate that water breathing comes into effect
when you are engulfed in water or a similar liquid.
5th-leveI necromancy
The contingent spell takes effect immediately after thc
Casting Time: 1 action circumstance is met for the first time, whether or not you
Range: Touch want it to, and then contingencyends.
Component: V, S
Duration: 7 days The contingent spell takes effect only on you, even
if it can normally target others. Vou can use only one
Your touch inflicts disease. Make a melee spell atlack contingency spell at a time. If you cast this spell again,
against a creature within your reach. On a hit, you aftlict the effect of another contingency spell on you ends. Also,
the creature with a disease of your choice from any of contingency ends on you if its material component is
the ones described below. ever not on your person.

At the end of each of the target's turns, it must make CONTINUAL FLAME
a Constitution saving throw. After failing three of
these saving throws, the disease's effects last for the 2nd./evel evocation
duration, and the creature stops making these saves.
After succeeding on three of these saving throws, the Casting Time: 1 action
creature recovers from the disease, and the spell ends. Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (ruby dust worth 50 gp, which the
Since this spell induces a natural disease in its
target, any effect that removes a disease or otherwise spell consumes)
ameliorates a disease's effects apply to it. Duration: Until dispelled

Blinding Sickness. Pain grips the creature's mind, A flame, equivalent in brightness to a torch, springs
and its eyes turn milky white. The creature has forth from an object that you touch. The cffect looks like
disadvantage on Wisdom checks and Wisdom saving a regular flame, hut it creates no heat and doesn't use
throws and is blinded, oxygen. A continuaI liame can be covered or hidden but
not smothered or quenched.
FiJth Fever. A raging fever sweeps through the
creature's body. The creature has disadvantage on CONTROL WATER
Strength checks, Strength saving throws. and attack
rolls that use Strength. 4th-leveI transnllltation

Flesh Rot. The creature's flesh decays. The creature Casting Time: 1 action
has disadvantage on Charisma checks and vulnerability Range: 300 fect
to ali damage. Components: V, S, M (a drop ofwater and a

Mindfire. The creature's mind becomes feverish. The pinch of dust)
creature has disadvantage on Intelligcnce checks and Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Intelligence saving throws, and the creature behaves as
if under the effects of the confusion spell during combat. Until the spell cnds, you control any frcestanding water
inside an arca you choose that is a cube up to 100 feet
Seizure. The creature is ovcrcomc with shaking. on a side. Vou can choose from any of the following
The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity checks, effccts when you cast this spcll. As an action on your
Dcxterity saving throws, and attack rolls that turn, you can rcpeat the same effect or choosc a
use Dexterity. different one.

Slimy Doom. The creaturc begins to bleed Flood. Vou cause the water Icvel of ali standing water in
uncontrollably. The creature has disadvantagc on the area to rise by as much as 20 feet. If the area includes
Constitution checks and Constitution saving throws. a shore, the flooding water spills over onto dry land.
In addition, whenever the creature takcs damage, it is
stunned until the end of its next turno If you choose an area in a large body of water. you
instead create a 20-foot tall wave that travels from one
CONTINGENCY side of the area to the other and then crashes down. Any
Huge or smaller vehiclcs in the wave's path are carried
6th-leveI evocation with it lo the other side. Any Huge or smaller vehicles
struck by the wave have a 25 percent chance of capsizing.
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Self The water levei remains elevated until the spell ends
or you choose a different effect. Ifthis effect produced

PART 3 SPEI L~

227


a wave, the wave repeats on the start of your next turn PRECIPITATION
while the fiood effect lasts.
Stage Condition
Part Water. Vou cause water in the area to move 1 Clear
aparl and creale a lrench. The trench extends across 2 Light clouds
the spell's area, and the separaled waler forms a wall lo 3 Overcast or ground fog
either side. The lrench remains unlil lhe spell ends or 4 Rain, hail, or snow
you choose a different effect. The waler lhen slowly fills 5 Torrential rain, driving hail, or blizzard
in lhe trench over lhe course of the next round until the
normal water levei is restored. TEMPERATURE WIND Condition
Calm
Redirect FIow. Vou cause fiowing water in the area Stage Condition Stage Moderate wind
to move in a direction you choose, even if the water has 1 Unbearable heat 1 Strong wind
to fiow over obstacles, up walls, or in other unlikely 2 Hot 2 Gale
directions. The water in the area moves as you direct 3 Warm 3 Storm
it, but once it moves beyond the spell's area, it resumes 4 Cool 4
its fiow based on the terrain conditions. The water 5 Cold 5
continues to move in the direction you chose until the 6 Arctic cold
spell ends or you choose a different effect.
CORDON OF ARROWS
WhirIpooI. This effect requires a body of water 2nd-leveI transmutation
at least 50 feet square and 25 feet deep. Vou cause
a whirlpool to form in the center of the area. The Casting Time: I action
whirlpool forms a vortex that is 5 feet wide at the Range: 5 feet
base, up to 50 feet wide ai the top, and 25 feel tall. Any Components: V, S, M (four or more arrows or bolts)
creature or object in the water and within 25 feet of the Duration: 8 hours
vortex is pulled 10 feet toward it. A creature can swim
away from the vortex by making a Strength (Athletics) Vou plant four pieces of nonmagical ammunition-
check against your spell save DC. arrows or crossbow bolts-in the ground within range
and lay magic upon them to protect an area. Until the
When a creature enters the vortex for the first time on spell ends, whenever a creature other than you comes
a turn or starts its turn there, it must make a Strength within 30 feet of the ammunition for the first time on a
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 2d8 turn or ends its turn there, one piece of ammunition fiies
bludgeoning damage and is caught in the vortex until up to strike it. The creature must succeed on a Dexterity
the spell ends. On a successful save, the creature takes saving throw or take Id6 piercing damage. The piece of
half damage, and isn't caught in the vortex. A crealure ammunition is then destroyed. The spell ends when no
caught in the vortex can use its action to try to swim ammunition remains.
away from the vortex as described above, but has
disadvanlage on lhe Strength (Athletics) check to do so. When you cast this spell, you can designate any
creatures you choose, and the spell ignores them.
The first time each turn that an object enters the
vortex, the object takes 2d8 bludgeoning damage; this At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
damage occurs each round it remains in the vortex. a spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the amount of
ammunition that can be affected increases by two for
CONTROL WEATHER each slot levei above 2nd.
8th.level transmutation
COUNTERSPELL
Casting Time: lO minutes 3rd.level abjuration
Range: Self (5-mile radius)
Components: V, S, M (burning incense and bits of earth Casting Time: I reaction, which you take when you see
a creature within 60 feet of you casting a spell
and wood mixed in water)
Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours Range: 60 feet
Components: S
Vou take control of the weather within 5 miles of you Duration: Instantaneous
for the duration. Vou must be outdoors to cast this spell.
Moving to a place where you don't have a clear path to Vou altempt to interrupt a creature in the process of
the sky ends the spell early. casting a spell. lf the creature is casting a spell of 3rd
levei or lower, its spell fails and has no effect. lf it is
When you cast the spell, you change the current casting a spell of 4th leveI or higher, make an ability
weather conditions, which are determined by the DM check using your spellcasting ability. The DC equals 10
based on the climate and season. Vou can change + the spell's leveI. On a success, the creature's spell fails
precipitation, temperature, and wind. lt takes Id4 x 10 and has no effect.
minutes for the new conditions lO take effect. Once they
do so. you can change the conditions again. When the At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell ends, the weather gradually returns to normal. spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the interrupted spell has
no effect if its levei is less than or equal to the levei of the
When you change the weather conditions, find a spell slot you used.
current condition on the following tables and change its
stage by one, up or down. When changing the wind, you
can change its direction.

228 PART 3 I SPELLS


CREATE FOOD AND WATER 24 hours, you must cast this spell on the creature
before the current 24-hour period ends. This use
3rd-Ievel conjuration of the spell reasserts your control over up to three
creatures you have animated with this spell, rather than
Casting Time: I action animating new ones.
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
Duration: Instantaneous 7th-leveI spell slot, you can animate or reassert control
over four ghouls. When you cast this spellusing an
Vou create 45 pounds of food and 30 gallons of water 8th-leveI spell slot, you can animate or reassert control
on the ground or in containers within range, enough over tive ghouls or two ghasts or wights. When you cast
to sustain up to tifteen humanoids or tive steeds for this spell using a 9th-leveI spell slot, you can animate or
24 hours. The food is bland but nourishing, and spoils reassert control over six ghouls, three ghasts or wights,
if uneaten after 24 hours. The water is clean and or two mummies.
doesn't go bad.
CREATION
CREATE OR DESTROY WATER
5th-levei il/usion
1st-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I minute
Casting Time: I action Range: 30 feet
Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a tiny piece of matter of the same
Components: V, S, M (a drop of water if creating water
type of the item you plan to create)
or a few grains of sand if destroying it) Duration: Special
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou pull wisps of shadow material from the Shadowfell
Vou either create or destroy water. to create a nonliving object of vegetable matter within
Create Water. Vou create up to 10 gallons of clean range: 50ft goods. rope, wood, or something similar. Vou
can also use this spell to create mineral objects such as
water within range in an open container. Alternatively, stone, crystal, or metal. The object created must be no
the water falls as rain in a 30-foot cube within range, larger than a 5-foot cube, and the object must be of a
extinguishing exposed fiames in the area. form and material that you have seen before.

Destroy Water. Vou destroy up to 10 gallons of water The duration depends on the object"s material. If
in an open container within range. Alternatively, you the object is composed of multiple materiaIs, use the
destroy fog in a 30-foot cube within range. shortest duration.

At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a Material Duration
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, you create or destroy Vegetable matter
10 additional gallons of water, or the size of the cube Stone ar crystal 1 day
increases by 5 feet, for each slot leveI above 1st. Precious metais 12 hours
Gems 1 hour
CREATE UNDEAD Adamantine ar mithral
la minutes
6th-leveI necromancy
1 minute
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 10 feet Using any material created by this spell as another
Components: V, S, M (one clay pot tilled with grave dirt. spell's material component causes that spell to fail.

one clay pot tilled with brackish water, and one 150 gp At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
black onyx stone for each corpse) spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the cube increases by 5
Duration: Instantaneous feet for each slot leveI above 5th.

Vou can cast this spell only at nighl. Choose up to three CROWN OF MADNESS
corpses of Medium or Small humanoids within range.
Each corpse becomes a ghoul under your control. (The 2nd-leveI enchantment
DM has game statistics for these creatures.)
Casting Time: I action up to I minute
As a bonus action on each of your turns, you can Range: 120 feet
mentally command any creature you animated with Components: V, S
this spell ifthe creature is within 120 feet ofyou (ifyou Duration: Concentration,
control multiple creatures, you can command any or ali
of them at the same time, issuing the same command to One humanoid of your choice that you can see within
each one). Vou decide what action the creature will take range must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or
and where it will move during its next turn, or you can become charmed by you for the duration. While
issue a general command, such as to guard a particular the target is charmed in this way, a twisted crown
chamber or corridor. If you issue no commands, the of jagged iron appears on its head, and a madness
creature only defends itself against hostile creatures. glows in its eyes.
Once given an order, the creature continues to follow it
until its task is complete. The charmed target must use its action before moving
on each of its turns to make a melee attack against a
The creaturc is under your control for 24 hours, creature other than itself that you mentally choose.
after which it stops obeying any command you have
given il. To maintain control of the creature for another

PART 3 SPELLS

229


The target can act normally on its turn if you choose no duration. The darkness spreads around corners.
creature or if none are within its reach. A creature with darkvision can't see through this
darkness, and nonmagical light can't illuminate il.
On your subsequent turns, you must use your action to
maintain control over the target, or the spell ends. AIso, If the point you choose is on an object you are holding
the target can make a Wisdom saving throw at the end or one that isn't being worn or carried, the darkness
of each of its turns. On a success. the spell ends. emanates from the object and moves with il. Completely
covering the source of the darkness with an opaque
CRUSADER'S MANTLE object, such as a bowl or a heIm, blocks the darkness.
3rd-Ievel evocation
]f any of this spell's area overlaps with an area of light
Casting Time: I action up to I minute created by a spell of 2nd levei or lower, the spell that
Range: Self created the light is dispelled.
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, DARKVISION
2nd-levei transmutation
Holy power radiates from you in an aura with a 30-foot
radius, awakening boldness in friendly creatures. Until Casting Time: I action
the spell ends, the aura moves with you, centered on Range: Touch
you. While in the aura, each nonhostile creature in the Components: V. S, M (either a pinch of dried
aura (including you) deals an extra Id4 radiant damage
when it hits with a weapon attack. carrot or an agate)
Duration: 8 hours
CURE WOUNDS
1st-levei evocation Vou touch a willing creature to grant it the ability to
see in the dark. For the duration. that creature has
Casting Time: I action darkvision out to a range of 60 feel.
Range: Touch
Components: V, S DAYLIGHT
Duration: Instantaneous 3rd-Ievel evocation

A creature you touch regains a number of hit points Casting Time: I action
equal to Id8 + your spellcasting ability modifier. This Range: 60 feet
spell has no effect on undead or constructs. Components: V, S
Duration: I hour
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the healing increases by A 60-foot-radius sphere of light spreads out from a point
Id8 for each slot leveI above I sI. you choose within range. The sphere is bright light and
sheds dim light for an additional 60 feel.
DANCING LIGHTS
Evocation cantrip ]f you chose a point on an object you are holding or
one that isn't being worn or carried, the light shines
Casting Time: I action or wychwood, from the object and moves with it. Completely covering
Range: 120 feet the affected object with an opaque object, such as a bowl
Components: V, S, M (a bit of phosphorus or a helm, blocks the light.

or a glowworm) If any of this spell's area overlaps with an area of
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute darkness created by a spell of 3rd levei or lower, the
spell that created the darkness is dispelled.
Vou create up to four torch-sized lights within range,
making them appear as torches, lanterns, or glowing DEATH WARD
orbs that hover in the air for the duration. Vou can 4th-levei abjuration
also combine the four Iights into one glowing vaguely
humanoid form of Medium size. Whichever form you Casting Time: I action
choose, each light sheds dim light in a lO-foot radius. Range: Touch
Components: V, S
As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the Duration: 8 hours
lights up to 60 feet to a new spot within range. A Iight
must be within 20 feet of another light created by this Vou touch a creature and grant it a measure of
spell, and a light winks out if it exceeds the spell's range. protection from death.

DARKNESS The first time the target would drop to O hit points as a
2nd-levei evocation result of taking damage, the target instead drops to I hit
point, and the spell ends.
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet If the spell is still in effect when the target is subjected
Components: V, M (bat fur and a drop of pitch or to an effect lhat would kill it instantaneously without
dealing damage, that effect is instead negated against
piece of coai) the target, and the spell ends.
Duration: Concentration, up to lO minutes
DELAYED BLAST FIREBALL
Magical darkness spreads from a point you choose 7th-levei evocation
within range to fill a IS-foot-radius sphere for the
Casting Time: I action

PART 3 I SPELLS

230


Range: ISO feel Vou slrike the ground, creating a burst of divine
Components: V, S, M (a liny ball of bal energy that ripples oulward ftom you. Each creature
you choose within 30 feet of you must succeed on a
guano and sulfur) Conslitution saving throw OI'take 5d6 thunder damage,
Duralion: Concenlralion, up lO I minule as well as 5d6 radiant OI'necrotic damage (your choice),
and be knocked prone. A creature that succeeds on
A beam of yellow lighl lIashes from your poinling finger, its saving throw takes half as much damage and isn't
then condenses lo linger aI a chosen poinl wilhin range knocked prone.
as a glowing bead for the duralion. When lhe spell
ends, either beca use your concentration is broken OI' DETECT EVIL ANO Gooo
because you decide to end it, lhe bead blossoms with a 1st-IeveI divination
low roar inlo an explosion of liame Ihal spreads around
corners. Each crealure in a 20.fool.radius sphere Casting Time: I aclion up to 10 minutes
centered on that point must make a Dexterity saving Range:Se]f
throw. A crealure lakes fire damage equal to lhe total Components: V, S
accumulated damage on a failed save, OI'half as much Duration: Concentration,
damage on a successful one.
For the duralion, you know if Ihere is an aberration,
The spell's base damage is 12d6. If at the end of celestial, elemenlal, fey, fiend, OI'undead within 30
your lurn lhe bead has not yet detonated, lhe damage feet of you, as well as where lhe crealure is located.
increases by Id6. Similarly, you know if there is a place 01' object within
30 feet of you Ihat has been magically consecrated
]f the glowing bead is touched before the interval OI'desecrated.
has expired, lhe creature touching it must make a
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the spell ends The spell can penetrate most barriers, but it is blocked
immediately, causing the bead 10 erupt in liame. On a by I fool of slone, I inch of common metal, a thin sheel
successful save, the crealure can throw the bead up to of lead, OI'3 feel of wood OI'dir!.
40 fee!. When it strikes a creature 01' a solid objecl, the
spell ends, and lhe bead explodes. DETECT MAGIC
1st-leveI divination (ritual)
The fire damages objecls in the area and ignites
lIammable objecls that aren'l being worn OI'carried. Casting Time: I action up to 10 minutes
Range: Self
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using Components: V, S
a spell slot of 8th leveI OI'higher, lhe base damage Duration: Concentration,
increases by Id6 for each sI01 leveI above 71h.
For the duration, you sense the presence of magic
DEMIPLANE wilhin 30 feet of you. ]f you sense magic in Ihis way, you
8th./evel conjuratian can use your action to see a faint aura around any visible
creature OI'object in the area that bears magic, and you
Casling Time: I action learn its school of magic. if any.
Range: 60 feet
Components: S The spell can penetrate most barriers, but it is blocked
Duralion: I hour by I foot of slone, I inch of common metal, a Ihin sheel
of lead, OI'3 feet of wood OI'di r!.
Vou create a shadowy door on a lIat solid surface that
you can see within range. The door is large enough to DETECT POISON ANO DISEASE
allow Medium creatures lo pass through unhindered. 1st-leveI divination (ritual)
When opened, lhe door leads lo a demiplane Ihat
appears to be an empty room 30 feet in each dimension, Casting Time: I action
made of wood 01' stone. When the spell ends, the door Range: Self
disappears, and any crealures 01' objects inside the Components: V, S, M (a yew leaf)
demiplane remain trapped Ihere, as lhe door also Duration: Concenlration, up to 10 minutes
disappears from the olheI' side.
For the duration, you can sense the presence and
Each time you casl this spell, you can create a new location of poisons, poisonous creatures, and diseases
demiplane, OI'have the shadowy doar connect to a within 30 feel of you. Vou also identify the kind of
demiplane you created with a previous casting of this poison, poisonous creature, ar disease in each case.
spell. Additionally, if you know the nature and contents
of a demiplane created bya casting of this spell by The spell can penelrate most barriers, but it is blocked
another creature, you can have lhe shadowy door by I foot of slone, I inch of common metal, a thin sheet
connecl to its demiplane inslead. of lead, OI'3 feet of wood OI'dir!.

DESTRUCTIVE WAVE DETECT THOUGHTS
5thJevelevocation 2nd.level divination

Casling Time: I action Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot radius) Range: Self
Componenls: V Components: V, S, M (a copper piece)
Duration: Inslantaneous Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

PART 3 SPELLS 231


For the duration, you can read the thoughts of certain DISGUISE SELF
creatures, When you cast the spell and as your action on
each turn until the spell ends, you can focus your mind 1st-leve,i iIIusion
on any one creature that you can see within 30 feet of
you, If the creature you choose has an Intelligence of Casting Time: 1 action
3 or lower or doesn't speak any language, the crealure Range: Self
is unaffected. Components: V, S
Duration: 1 hour
Vou initially learn the surface thoughts of the
creature-what is most on its mind in that moment. As Vou make yourself-including your clothing, armor,
an action, you can either shift your atlention lo another weapons, and other belongings on your person-Iook
creature's thoughts or atlempt to probe deeper into the different until the spell ends ar until you use your action
same creature's mind. ]f you probe deeper, the target to dismiss it. Vou can seem 1 foot shorter or taller and
must make a Wisdom saving throw. If it fails, you gain can appear thin, fat, or in belween. Vou can't change
insight into its reasoning (if any), its emotional state, your body type, so you must adopt a form that has the
and something that looms large in ils mind (such as same basic arrangement of limbs. Otherwise, the extent
something it worries over, loves, or hates). ]f it succeeds, of the illusion is up to you.
the spell ends. Either way, the target knows that you are
probing into its mind, and unless you shift your atlention The changes wrought by this spell fail to hold up lo
to another creature's thoughts, the creature can use physical inspection. For example, if you use this spell
its action on its turn to make an lntelligence check to add a hat to your oUlfit, objects pass through the hat,
contested by your Intelligence check; if it succeeds, and anyone who touches it would feel nothing or would
the spell ends. feel your head and hair. If you use this spell to appear
thinner than you are, lhe hand of someone who reaches
Questions verbally directed at the target creature out lOtouch you would bump into you while it was
naturally shape the course of its thoughts, so this spell seemingly still in midair.
is particularly effective as part of an interrogation.
To discern that you are disguised, a creature can use
Vou can also use this spell to detect the presence of its action to inspect your appearance and must succeed
thinking creatures you can't see. When you cast the on an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
spell or as your action during the duration, you can spell save De.
search for thoughts within 30 feet of YOUT. he spell can
penetrate barriers, but 2 feet of rock, 2 inches of any DISINTEGRATE
metal other than lead, or a thin sheet of lead blocks you. 6th-levei transmutation
Vou can't detect a creature with an lntelligence of 3 or
lower or one that doesn't speak any language. Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Once you de tecI the presence of a creature in this way, Components: V, S, M (a lodestone and a pinch of dust)
you can read its lhoughts for the rest of the duration as Duration: lnstantaneous
described above, even if you can't see it, but it must still
be within range. A thin green ray springs from your pointing finger to a
target that you can see within range. The target can be a
DIMENSION DOOR creature, an objecl, or a creation of magical force, such
as the wall created by wall of force.
4th-levei conjuration
A creature targeted by this spell must make a
Casting Time: 1 action Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the target takes
Range: 500 feet IOd6 + 40 force damage. If lhis damage reduces the
Components: V target to O hit points, it is disintegrated.
Duration: Instantaneous
A disintegrated creature and everything il is wearing
Vou teleport yourself from your current location lo any and carrying, except magic ilems, are reduced to a pile
other spot within range. Vou arrive at exactly the spot of fine gray dust. The creature can be restored to life
desired. It can be a place you can see, one you can only by means of a true resurrection or a wish spell.
visualize, or one you can describe by stating distance
and direclion, such as "200 feet straight downward" or This spell automatically disintegrates a Large or
"upward to the northwest at a 45-degree angle, 300 feet." smaller nonmagical object or a creation of magical
force. ]f the target is a Huge or larger object or creation
Vou can bring along objects as long as their weight of force, this spell disintegrates a lO-foot-cube portion of
doesn't exceed what you can carry. Vou can also bring it. A magic item is unaffecled by this spell.
one willing creature of your size or smaller who is
carrying gear up to its carrying capacity. The creature At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
must be within 5 feet of you when you cast this spell. spell slot of 7th leveI or higher, the damage increases by
3d6 for each slot levei above 6th.
If you would arrive in a place already occupied byan
object or a creature, you and any creature traveling with DISPEL EVIL AND GOOD
you each take 4d6 force damage, and the spell fails to 5th-levei abjuration
teleport you.
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: SeI f

PAR r 3 SPELL


Components: V, S, M (holy water or powdered DIVINATION
silver and iron) 4th-levei divination (ritual)

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Shimmering energy surrounds and protects you from Components: V, S, M (incense and a sacrifieial offering
fey, undead, and creatures originating from beyond the
Material Plane. For the duration, celestiais, elementals, appropriate to your religion, together worth at least 25
fey, fiends, and undead have disadvantage on attack gp, which the spell consumes)
rolls against you. Duration: Instantaneous

Vou can end the spell early by using either of the Your magic and an offering put you in contact with
following special functions. a god or a god's servants. Vou ask a single question
concerning a speeific goal, event, or activity to occur
Break Enchantment. As your action, you touch a within 7 days. The DM offers a truthful reply. The reply
creature you can reach that is charmed, frightened, or might be a short phrase, a cryptic rhyme, or an omen.
possessed bya celestial, an elemental, a fey, a fiend,
or an undead. The creature you touch is no longer The spell doesn't take into account any possible
charmed, frightened, or possessed by such creatures. circumstances that might change the outcome, such
as the casting of additional spells or the loss or gain
DismissaI. As your action, make a melee spell attack of a companion.
against a celestial, an elemental, a fey, a fiend, or an
undead you can reach. On a hit, you attempt to drive If you cast the spell two or more times before finishing
the creature back to its home plane. The creature must your next long rest, there is a cumulative 25 percent
succeed on a Charisma saving throw or be sent back to chance for each casting after the first that you get a
its home plane (if it isn't there already). If they aren't on random reading. The DM makes this roll in secret.
their home plane, undead are sent to the Shadowfell,
and fey are sent to the Feywild. DIVINE FAVOR
1st-Ievel evocarion
DISPEL MAGIe
3rd-Ievel abjuration Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Casting Time: 1 action Components: V, S
Range: 120 feet Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous Your prayer empowers you with divine radiance. Until
the spell ends, your weapon attacks deal an extra 1d4
Choose one creature, object, or magical effect within radiant damage on a hit.
range. Any spell of 3rd levei or lower on the target ends.
For each spell of 4th levei or higher on the target. make DIVINE WORD
an ability check using your spellcasting ability. The 7th-levei evocation
DC equals 10 + the spell's leveI. On a successful check,
the spell ends. Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 30 fee!
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a Components: V
spell slot of 4th level or higher, you automatically end Duration: Instantaneous
the effec!s of a spell on the target if the spell's levei is
equal to or less than the levei of the spell slot you used. You utter a divine word, imbued with the power thar
shaped the world at the dawn of ereation. Choose any
DISSONANT WHISPERS number of creatures you can see within range. Each
1st-levei enchantment creature that can hear you must make a Charisma
saving throw. On a failed save, a creature suffers an
Casting Time: 1 action effect based on its current hit points:
Range: 60 feet
Components: V 50 hit points or fewer: deafened for 1 minute
Duration: Instantaneous 40 hit points or fewer: deafened and blinded for 10
minutes
Vou whisper a discordam melody that only one creature 30 hit points ar fewer: blinded, deafened, and stunned
of your choice within range can hear, wracking it with for 1 hour
terrible pain. The target must make a Wisdom saving 20 hit points or fewer: killed instantly
throw. On a failed save, it takes 3d6 psychic damage and
must immediately use its reaction, if available, to move Regardless of its current hit points, a celestial, an
as far as its speed allows away from you. The creature elemental, a fey. or a fiend that fails its save is forced
back to its plane of origin (if it isn't there already) and
doesn't Inove into obviously dangerous ground, such can't return to your current plane for 24 hours byany
means short of a wish spell.
as a fire or a pit. On a successful save, the target takes
half as much damage and doesn't have to move away. A DOMINATE BEAST
deafened creature automatically succeeds on the save. 4th-levei enchantment

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a Casting Time: 1 action
spell slot of 2nd level or higher. the damage increases by
Id6 for each slot levei above 1st.

234 P"Rf 3 SPELLS


Range: 60 feet Each time the target takes damage, it makes a new
Components: V, 5 Wisdom saving throw against the spell. If the saving
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute throw succeeds, the spell ends.

Vou attempt to beguile a beast that you can see within At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell with
range. lt must succeed on a Wisdom saving thraw or be a 9th.level spell slot, the duration is concentration,
charmed by you for the duration. ]f you or creatures that up to 8 hours.
are friendly to you are fighting it, it has advantage on the
saving thraw. DOMINATE PERSON
5th.level enchantment
While the beast is charmed, you have a telepathic link
with it as long as the two of you are on the same plane Casting Time: I action up to I minute
of existence. Vou can use this telepathic link to issue Range: 60 feet
commands to the creature while you are conscious (no Components: V, 5
action required), which it does its best to obey. Vou can Duration: Concentration,
specifya simple and general course of action, such as
"Attack that creature." "Run over there," or "Fetch that Vou attempt to beguile a humanoid that you can see
objec!." If the creature completes the order and doesn't within range. lt must succeed on a Wisdom saving
receive further direction from you, it defends and throw or be charmed by you for the duration. If you or
preserves itself to the best of its ability. creatures that are friendly to you are fighting it, it has
advantage on the saving throw.
Vou can use your action to take total and precise
contraI of the targe!. Until the end of your next turn, the While the target is charmed, you have a telepathic link
creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't with it as long as the two of you are on the same plane
do anything that you don't allow it to do. During this of existence. Vou can use this telepathic link to issue
time, you can also cause the creature to use a reaction, commands to the creature while you are conscious (no
but this requires you to use your own reaction as well. action required), which it does its best to obey. Vou can
specify a simple and general course of action, such as
Each time the target takes damage, it makes a new "Attack that creature," "Run over there," or "Fetch that
Wisdom saving thraw against the spell. ]f the saving object." If the creature completes the order and doesn't
throw succeeds, the spell ends. receive further direction from you, it defends and
preserves itself to the best of its ability.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell with a
5th.level spell slot, the duration is concentration, up Vou can use your action to take total and precise
to 10 minutes. When you use a 6th.level spell slot, contrai of the targe!. Until the end of your next turn, the
the duration is concentration, up to I hour. When you creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't
use a spell slot of 7th levei or higher, the duration is do anything that you don't allow it to do. During this
concentration, up to 8 hours. time you can also cause the creature to use a reaction,
but this requires you to use your own reaction as well.
DOMINATE MONSTER
8th.level enchantment Each time the target takes damage, it makes a new
Wisdom saving throw against the spell. If the saving
Casting Time: I action up to I hour throw succeeds, the spell ends.
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5 At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using
Duration: Concentration, a 6th.level spell slot, the duration is concentration,
up to 10 minutes. When you use a 7th.level spell slot,
Vou attempt to beguile a creature that you can see the duration is concentration, up to I hour. When you
within range. lt must succeed on a Wisdom saving use a spell slot of 8th levei or higher, the duration is
throw or be charmed by you for the duration. If you or concentration, up to 8 hours.
creatures that are friendly to you are fighting it, it has
advantage on the saving throw. DRAWMIJ'S INSTANT SUMMONS
6th.level conjuration (ritual)
While the creature is charmed, you have a telepathic
link with it as long as the two of you are on the same Casting Time: I minute
plane of existence. Vou can use this telepathic link to Range: Touch
issue commands to the creature while you are conscious Components: V, 5, M (a sapphire worth 1,000 gp)
(no action required), which it does its best to obey. Vou Duration: Until dispelled
can specify a simple and general course of action, such
as "Attack that creature," "Run over there," or "Fetch Vou touch an object weighing 10 pounds or less whose
that object." If the creature completes the order and longest dimension is 6 feet or less. The spellleaves an
doesn't receive further direction from you, it defends invisible mark on its surface and invisibly inscribes the
and preserves itself to the best of its ability. na me of the item on the sapphire you use as the material
componen!. Each time you cast this spell, you must use
Vou can use your action to take total and precise a different sapphire.
contraI of the targe!. Until the end of your next turn, the
creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't At any time thereafter, you can use your action to
do anything that you don't allow it to do. During this speak the item's name and crush the sapphire. The item
time, you can also cause the creature to use a reaction, instantly appears in your hand regardless of physical or
but this requires you to use your own reaction as well. planar distances, and the spell ends.

PART 3 SPELLS 235


]f another creature is holding or carrying the item, for c1ear skies, a c10ud for rain, falling snowflakes for
crushing the sapphire doesn't transport the item to you, snow, and so on. This effect persists for I round.
but instead you learn who the creature possessing the Vou instantly make a flower blossom, a seed pod open,
object is and roughly where that creature is located or a leaf bud bloom.
at that moment. Vou create an instantaneous, harmless sensory effect,
such as falling leaves, a puff of wind, the sound of a
Dispel magic or a similar effect successfully applied to small animal, or the faint odor of skunk. The effect
the sapphire ends this spell's effect. must fit in a 5-foot cube.
Vou instantly light or snuff out a candle, a torch, or a
DREAM small campfire.
5th-leveI iIIusion
EARTHQUAKE
Casting Time: I minute 8th-leveI evocation
Range: 5pecial
Components: V, 5, M (a handful of sand, a dab of ink, Casting Time: I action
Range: 500 feet
and a writing quill plucked from a sleeping bird) Components: V, 5, M (a pinch of dirl, a piece of rock,
Duration: 8 hours
and a lump of c1ay)
This spell shapes a creature's dreams. Choose a Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
creature known to you as the target of this spell. The
target must be on the same plane of existence as you. Vou create a seismic disturbance at a point on the
Creatures that don't sleep, such as elves, can't be ground that you can see within range. For the duration,
contacted by this spell. Vou, or a willing creature you an intense tremor rips through the ground in a
touch, enlers a trance state, acting as a messenger. 100-foot-radius circ1e centered on that point and shakes
While in the trance, the messenger is aware of his or creatures and structures in contact with the ground
her surroundings, but can't take actions or move. in that area.

If the target is asleep, the messenger appears in the The ground in the area becomes difficult terrain.
target's dreams and can converse with the target as Each creature on the ground that is concentrating must
long as it remains asleep, through the duration of the make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the
spell. The messenger can also shape the environment creature's concentration is broken.
of the dream, creating landscapes. objects, and other
images. The messenger can emerge from the trance at When you cast this spell and at the end of each turn
any time, ending the effect of the spell early. The target you spend concentrating on it, each creature on the
recalls the dream perfectly upon waking. If the target is ground in the area must make a Dexterity saving throw.
awake when you cast the spell, the messenger knows it, On a failed save, the creature is knocked prone.
and can either end the trance (and the spell) or wait for
the target to fali asleep, at which point the messenger This spell can have additional effects depending on
appears in the target's dreams. the terra in in the area, as determined by the DM.

Vou can make the messenger appear monstrous Fissures. Fissures open throughout the spell's area at
and terrifying to the target. If you do, the messenger the start of your next turn after you cast the spell. A total
can deliver a message of no more than ten words and of Id6 such fissures open in locations chosen by the DM.
then the target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On Each is IdlO x 10 feet deep, la feet wide, and extends
a failed save, echoes of the phantasmal monstrosity from one edge of the spell's area to the opposite side.
spawn a nightmare that lasts the duration of the target's A creature standing on a spot where a fissure opens
sleep and prevents the target from gaining any benefit must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or fali in. A
from that rest. In addition, when the target wakes up, it creature that sllccessfully saves moves with the fissure's
takes 3d6 psychic damage. edge as it opens.

If you have a body part, lock of hair, c1ipping from a A fissure that opens beneath a structure causes it to
nail, or similar portion of the target's body, the target automatically collapse (see below).
makes its saving throw with disadvantage.
Structures. The tremor deals 50 bludgeoning damage
DRUIDCRAFT to any structure in contact with the ground in the area
Transmutation cantrip when you cast the spell and at the start of each of your
turns until the spell ends. ]f a structure drops to Ohit
Casting Time: I action points, it collapses and potentially damages nearby
Range: 30 feet creatures. A crealure within half the distance of a
Components: V, 5 structure's height must make a Dexterity saving throw.
Duration: Instantaneous On a failed save, the creature takes 5d6 bludgeoning
damage, is knocked prone, and is buried in the rubble,
Whispering to the spirits of nature, you create one of the requiring a DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check as an
following effects within range: action to escape. The DM can adjust the DC higher
or lower, depending on the nalure of the rubble. On
Vou create a tiny, harmless sensory effect that predicts a successful save, the creature takes half as much
what the weather will be at your location for the next damage and doesn't fali prone or become buried.
24 hours. The effect might manifest as a golden orb

PA RT 3 I SPELI.S


ELDRITCH BLAST ENLARGE/REDUCE
Evocation cantrip 2nd-leveI transmutation

Casting Time: 1 action Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet Range: 30 feet
Components: V,5 Components: V,5, M (a pinch of powdered iron)
Duration: lnstantaneous Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

A beam of crackling energy streaks toward a creature Vou cause a creature or an object you can see within
within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the range to grow larger or smaller for the duration. Choose
target. On a hit, the target takes ldlO force damage. either a creature ar an object that is neither worn
nor carried. If the target is unwilling, it can make a
The spell creates more than one beam when you reach Constitution saving throw. On a success, the spell
higher leveis: two beams at 5th levei, three beams at has no effect.
11th levei, and four beams at 17th leveI. Vou can direct
the beams at the same target or at different ones. Make If the target is a creature, everything it is wearing and
a separate attack roll for each beam. carrying changes size with it. Any item dropped byan
affected creature returns to normal size at once.
ELEMENTAL WEAPON
3rd-/evel transmutation Enlarge. The target's size doubles in ali dimensions,
and its weight is multiplied by eight. This growth
Casting Time: 1 action increases its size by one category-from Medium to
Range: Touch Large, for example. If there isn't enough room for the
Components: V, 5 target to double its size. the creature or object attains
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour the maximum possible size in the space available.
Until the spell ends, the target also has advantage on
A nonmagical weapon you touch becomes a magic 5trength checks and 5trength saving throws. The
weapon. Choose one of the following damage types: target's weapons also grow to match its new size. While
acid, cold, tire, Iightning, or thunder. For the duration, these weapons are enlarged, the target's attacks with
the weapon has a +1 bonus to attack rolls and deals an them deal ld4 extra damage.
extra ld4 damage of the chosen type when it hits.
Reduce. The target's size is halved in ali dimensions,
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a and its weight is reduced to one-eighth of normal. This
spell slot of 5th or 6th leveI. the bonus to attack rolls reduction decreases its size by one category-from
increases to +2 and the extra damage increases to Medium to 5mall, for example. Until the spell ends,
2d4. When you use a spell slot of 7th levei ar higher, the target also has disadvantage on 5trength checks
the bonus increases to +3 and the extra damage and 5trength saving throws. The target's weapons also
increases to 3d4. shrink to match its new size. While these weapons are
reduced, the target's attacks with them deal ld4 less
ENHANCE ABILITY damage (this can't reduce the damage below 1).
2nd-leveI transmutation
ENSNARING STRIKE
Casting Time: 1 action 1st-leveI conjuration
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (fur ar a feather from a beast) Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour. Range: 5elf
Components: V
Vou touch a creature and bestow upon it a magical Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
enhancement. Choose one of the following effects; the
target gains that effect until the spell ends. The next time you hit a creature with a weapon attack
before this spell ends, a writhing mass of thorny vines
Bear's Endurance. The target has advantage on appears at the point of impact, and the target must
Constitution checks. lt also gains 2d6 temporary hit succeed on a 5trength saving throw ar be restrained by
points, which are lost when the spell ends. the magical vines until the spell ends. A Large ar larger
creature has advantage on this saving throw. If the
BulJ's Strength. The target has advantage target succeeds on the save, the vines shrivel away.
on 5trength checks, and his or her carrying
capacity doubles. While restrained by this spell, the target takes ld6
piercing damage at the start of each of its turns. A creature
Cat's Grace. The target has advantage on Dexterity restrained by the vines or one lhat can touch the creature
checks. lt also doesn't take damage from falling 20 feet can use its action to make a 5trength check against your
or less if it isn't incapacitated. spell save De. On a success, the target is freed.

Eagle's Splendor. The target has advantage on At Higher LeveIs. If you cast this spell using a spell
Charisma checks. slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by ld6
for each slot levei above 1sI.
Fox's Cunning. The target has advantage on
Intelligence checks.

Owl's Wisdom. The target has advantage on
Wisdom checks.

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot leveI above 2nd.

PART 3 I SPlI LS 237


ENTANGLE When the spell ends, you immediately returo to the
1st.level conjuration plane you originated from in lhe spot you currently
occupy. If you occupy the same spot as a solid object
Casting Time: 1 action or creature when this happens, you are immediately
Range: 90 feet shunted to the nearest unoccupied space that you
Components: V,S can occupy and take force damage equal to twice lhe
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute number of feet you are moved.

Grasping weeds and vines sprout fram the ground in a This spell has no effect if you cast il while you are on
20-foot square starting from a point within range. For the Ethereal Plane or a plane that doesn't border it, such
the duration, these plants turo the ground in the area as one of the Outer Planes.
into difficult terrain.
At Higher Leve1s. When you cast this spell using
A creature in the area when you cast the spell must a spell slol of 81h leveI or higher, you can target up to
succeed on a Strength saving throw ar be restrained three willing crealures (including you) for each slot levei
by the entangling plants until the spell ends. A creature above 7th. The creatures musl be within 10 feet of you
restrained by the plants can use its action to make when you cast the spell.
a Strength check against your spell save De. On a
success, it frees itself. EVARD'S BLACK TENTACLES
4th.level conjuration
When the spell ends, the conjured plants wilt away.
Casting Time: 1 action
ENTHRALL Range: 90 feet
2nd.level enchantment Components: V,S, M (a piece of tentacle from a giant

Casting Time: 1 action octopus or a giant squid)
Range: 60 feet Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Components: V, S
Duration: 1 minute Squirming, ebony tentades fill a 20.foot square on
ground that you can see within range. For the duration,
Vou weave a distracting string of words, causing these tentacles turo lhe ground in the area into
creatllres ofyour choice that you can see within range difficult terrain.
and that can hear you to make a Wisdom saving
throw. Any creature that can't be charmed succeeds When a creature enlers the affected area for the first
on this saving throw automatically, and if you or YOllr time on aturo or starts its turo lhere, the creature
companions are fighting a creature, it has advantage on must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 3d6
the save. On a failed save, the target has disadvantage bludgeoning damage and be restrained by the tentacles
on Wisdom (Perception) checks made to perceive any until the spell ends. A creature that starts its turo in the
creature other than you until the spell ends or until the area and is already restrained by the tentacles lakes 3d6
target can no longer hear YOll.The spell ends if you are bludgeoning damage,
incapacitated or can no longer speak.
A creature reslrained by the tentacles can use ils
ETHEREALNESS action lo make a Strength ar Dexterity check (its choice)
7th-leveI transmutation against your spell save DC. On a success, it frees itself.

Casting Time: 1 action EXPEDITIOUS RETREAT
Range: Self 1st-leveI transmutation
Components: V, S
Duration: Up to 8 hours Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Vou step into the border regions of the Ethereal Plane, Components: V, S
in the area where it overlaps with your current plane. Duration: Concentration, up lo 10 minutes
Vou remain in the Border Ethereal for the duration or
until you use your action to dismiss the spell. During This spell allows you to move at an incredible pace.
this time, you can move in any direction. If you move When you cast this spell, and then as a bonus action
up or down, every foot of movement costs an extra fool. on each of your turos unlil the spell ends, you can take
Vou can see and hear the plane YOlloriginated from, but the Dash action.
everything there looks gray, and you can't see anything
more than 60 feet away. EYEBITE
6th.level necromancy
While on the Ethereal Plane, you can only affect and
be affected by other crealures on thal plane. Creatures Casting Time: 1 action
that aren't on the Elhereal Plane can't perceive you and Range: Self
can't interact with you, unless a special ability ar magic Components: V, S
has given them the ability to do so. Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

You ignore ali objects and effects lhat aren't on the For the spell's duration, your eyes beco me an inky void
Ethereal Plane, allowing you to move through objects imbued with dread power. One creature of your choice
you perceive on the plane you originated from. within 60 feet of you lhat you can see must succeed
on a Wisdom saving throw or be affected by one of the
following effects of your choice for the duralion. On

PART 3 I SPELLS


each of your turns until the spell ends, you can use FALSE LIFE
your aclion to target auother creature but can't target 1st-levei necromancy
a creature agaiu if it has succeeded on a saving throw
against this casting of eyebite, Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
As/eep. The targel falls unconscious, lt wakes up if it Components: V, S, M (a small amount of alcohol or
takes any damage nr if another creature uses its action
to shake the sleeper awake, distilled spirits)
Duration: I hour
Panicked. The target is frightened of you. On each
of its lurns, the frightened creature must take the Bolstering yourself with a necromantic facsimile of life,
Dash action and move away from you by the safest and you gain Id4 + 4 temporary hit points for the rluration.
shortest available route, unless there is nowhere to
move. lf the target moves to a place at least 60 feet away At Higher LeveIs. When you casl this spell using a
from you where it can no longer see you, this effect ends. spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, you gain 5 adrlitional
temporary hit points for each slollevel above 1st.
Sickened. The target has disadvantage ou attack rolls
and ability checks. At the end of each of its turns, it can FEAR
make another Wisdom saving throw. lf it succeeds, 3rd-level iIIusion
the effect ends.
Casting Time: I action
FABRICATE Range: Self (30-foot cone)
4th-levei transmutation Components: V, S, M (a white feather or the

Casting Time: lO minutes heart of a hen)
Range: 120 feet Duration: Concentration, up lo 1 minule
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous Vou project a phantasmal image of a creature's worst
fears. Each creature in a 30-foot cone must succeed on
Vou convert raw materiais into products of the same a Wisdom saving throw or rlrop whatever it is holrling
material. For example, you can fabricate a wooden anrl beco me frightened for the duration.
bridge from a c1ump of trees, a rope from a patch of
hemp, and C10thes from flax or wool. While frightened by this spell, a creature must take
the Dash action and move away from you by lhe safest
Choose raw materiais that you can see wilhin range. available route on each of its turns, unless there is
Vou can fabricale a Large or smaller object (contained nowhere to move. If the creature enrls its turn in a
within a lO-fool cube. ar eight connected 5-foot cubes), location where it doesn't have line of sight to you,
given a sufficient quantity of raw material. If you the creature can make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
are working with metal. stone, or anolher mineral successful save, the spell enrls for that creature.
substance, however, the fabricated object can be no
larger than Medium (coutained within a single 5-foot FEATHER FALL
cube). The quality of objects made by the spell is 1st-levei transmutation
commensurate with the quality of the raw materiais.
Casting Time: I reaction, which you take when you or a
Creatures or magic items can't be created or creature within 60 feet of YOII falls
transmuted by this spell. Vou also can't use it to
create items that ordinarily require a high degree of Range: 60 feet
craftsmanship, such as jewelry, weapons. glass, or Components: V, M (a sma 11feat her or piece of down)
armor, unless you have proficiency with the type of Duration: I minute
artisan's tools used to craft such objects.
Choose up to five falling creatures within range. A
FAERIE FIRE falling creature's rate of descent slows to 60 feet per
1st-leveI evocation round until the spell ends. lf the creature lands before
the spell ends, it takes no falling damage and can land
Casting Time: I action up to 1 minute on its feel, and the spell ends for that creature.
Range: 60 feet
Components: V FEEBLEMIND
Duration: Concentration, 8th-levei enchantment

Each object in a 20-foot cube within range is outlined in Casting Time: I action
blue, green, or violet light (your choice). Any creature in Range: ISO feet
the area when lhe spell is cast is also outlined in light if Components: V, S, M (a handful of c1ay,crystal, glass,
it fails a Dexterity saving throw. For lhe duration, objects
and affected creatures shed dim light in a 10.fool radius. or mineral spheres)
Durat;on: Instantaneous
Any attack roll against an affected creature or object
has arlvantage if the attacker can see it, and the affected Vou hlast the mind of a crealure that you can see within
creature or object can't benefit from being invisible. range, altempting to shatter its intellect and personality.
The target takes 4d6 psychic damage and must make an
Intelligence saving throw.

On a failed save, the creature's Intclligence and
Charisma scores become I. The creature can't cast
spells, activate magic items, understand language, or

P\kT3 l' L


communicate in any intelligible way. The creature can, you can cause it to reappear in any unoccupied space
however, identify its friends, follow them, and even within 30 feet of YOU.
protect them.
Vou can't have more than one familiar at a time. If you
At the end of every 30 days, the creature can repeat cast this spell while you already have a familiar, you
its saving throw against this spell. If it succeeds on its instead cause it to adopt a new formo Choose one of the
saving throw, the spell ends. forms from the above list. Your familiar transforms into
the chosen creature.
The spell can also be ended by greater restoration,
heal, or wish. Finally, when you cast a spell with a range of touch,
your familiar can deliver the spell as if it had cast the
FEIGN DEATH spell. Your familiar must be within 100 feet of you, and
3rd-Ievel necromancy (ritual) it must use its reaction to deliver the spell when you cast
it. If the spell requires an attack roll, you use your attack
Casting Time: 1 action modifier for the roll.
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a pinch of graveyard dirt) FINO STEEO
Duration: 1 hour 2nd-levei conjuration

Vou touch a willing creature and put it into a cataleptic Castiog Time: 10 minutes
state that is indistinguishable from death. Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5
For the spell's duration, or until you use an action Duratioo: Instantaneous
to touch the target and dismiss the spell, the target
appears dead to ali outward inspection and to spells Vou summon a spirit that assumes the form of an
used to determine the target's status. The target is unusually intelligent, strong, and loyal steed, creating a
blinded and incapacitated, and its speed drops to O. long-Iasting bond with it. Appearing in an unoccupied
The target has resistance to ali damage except psychic space within range, the steed takes on a form that you
damage. If the target is diseased or poisoned when you choose, such as a warhorse, a pony, a camel, ao elk, or
cast the spell, or becomes diseased or poisoned while a mastiff. (Your DM might allow other animais to be
under the spell's effect, the disease and poison have no summoned as steeds.) The steed has the statistics of the
effect until the spell ends. chosen form, though it is a celestial, fey, or fiend (your
choice) instead of its normal type. Additionally, if yaur
FINO FAMILIAR steed has an Intelligence of 5 or iess, its Intelligence
1st-levei conjuratian (ritual) becomes 6, and it gains the ability to understaod one
laoguage of your choice that you speak.
Casting Time: I hour
Range: 10 feet Your steed serves you as a mount, both in combat and
Components: V, 5, M (10 gp worth af charcaal, out, and you have an instinctive bond with it that allows
you to fight as a seamless unit. While mounted on your
incense, and herbs that must be consumed by fire in a steed, you can make any spell you cast that targets only
brass brazier) you also target your steed.
Duration: Instantaneous
Wheo the steed drops to O hit points, it disappears,
Vou gain the service of a familiar, a spirit that takes an leaving behind no physical formo Vou can also
animal form you choose: bat, cat, crab, frog (toad), hawk, dismiss your steed at any time as an action, causing
lizard, octopus, owl, poisonous snake, fish (quipper), it to disappear. In either case, casting this spell
rat, raven, sea horse, spider, or weasel. Appearing in again summons the same steed, restored to its hit
an unoccupied space within range, the familiar has the point maximum.
statistics of the chosen form, though it is a celestial, fey,
or fiend (your choice) instead of a beast. While your steed is within 1 mile of you, you can
communicate with it telepathically.
Your familiar acts independently of you, but it always
obeys your commands. In combat, it rolls its own You can't have more than one steed bonded by this
initiative and acts on its own turno A familiar can't spell at a time. As an action, you can release the steed
attack, but it can take other actions as normal. from its bond at any time, causing it to disappear.

When the familiar drops to O hit points, it disappears, FINO THE PATH
leaving behind no physical formo It reappears after you 6th-levei divination
cast this spell again
Casting Time: 1 minute
While your familiar is within 100 feet of you, you Range: 5elf
can communicate with it telepathically. Additionally, Components: V, 5, M (a set of divinatory tools-such
as an action, you can see through your familiar's eyes
and hear what it hears until the start of your next turn, as bones, ivory sticks, cards, teeth, or carved runes-
gaining the benefits of any special senses that the worth 100 gp and an object from the location you
familiar has. During this time, you are deaf and blind wish to find)
with regard to your own senses. Duration: Concentration, up to 1 day

As an action, you can temporarily dismiss your This spell allows you to find the shortest, most direct
familiar. It disappears into a pocket dimension where it physical route to a specific fixed location that you are
awaits your summons. Alternatively, you can dismiss it
forever. As an action while it is temporarily dismissed, familiar with on the same plane of existence. Ir you

PART 3 SPELLS


name a destination on another plane of existenee, a
destination that moves (sueh as a mobile fortress), or a
destination that isn't specilie (sueh as "a green dragon's
lair"), the spell fails.

For the duration, as long as you are on the same plane
of existenee as the destination, you know how far it is
and in what direetion it lies. While you are traveling
there, whenever you are presented with a ehoiee of
paths along the way, you automatieally determine whieh
path is the shortest and most direet route (but not
neeessarily the safest route) to the destination.

FIND TRAPS

2nd-leveI divination

Casting Time: 1 aetion
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous

You sense the presenee of any trap within range that
is within line of sight. A trap, for the purpose of this
spell, includes anything that would inflict a sudden or
unexpeeted effeet you eonsider harmful or undesirable,
which was speeilieally intended as sueh by its ereator.
Thus, the spell would sense an area affeeted by the
alarm spell, a glyph of warding, or a meehanieal pit trap,
but it would not reveal a natural weakness in the floor,
an unstable eeiling, or a hidden sinkhole.

This spell merely reveals that a trap is present. You
don't learo the loeation of eaeh trap, but you do learo the
general nature of the danger posed by a trap you sense.

FINGE R OF DEATH

7th-leveI neeromaney

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous

You send nega tive energy coursing through a ereature
that you ean see within range, causing it searing pain.
The target must make a Constitution saving throw. It
takes 7d8 + 30 necrotic damage on a failed save, or half
as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.

A humanoid killed by this spell rises at the start of
your next turo as a zombie that is permanently under
your command, following your verbal orders to the best
of its ability.

FIREBALL

3rd~evelevoeaUon

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S, M (a tiny ball of bat

guano and sulfur)
Duration: Instantaneous

A bright streak flashes from your pointing linger to a
point you ehoose within range and then blossoms with
a low roar into an explosion of flame. Each creature
in a 20-foot-radius sphere eentered on that point must
make a Dexterity saving throw. A target takes 8d6 /ire


damage on a failed save, or half as mueh damage on a FLAME BLADE
sueeessful one, 2nd./evel evoeation

The /ire spreads around eorners. It ignites flammable Casting Time: I bonus aetion
objeets in the area that aren't being worn or earried. Range: 5elf
Components: V, 5, M (leaf of sumae)
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a Duration: Coneentration, up to 10 minutes
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the damage inereases by
Id6 for eaeh slot levei above 3rd. Vou evoke a /iery blade in your free hand. The blade is
similar in size and shape to a seimitar, and it lasts for
FIRE BOLT the duration. lf you let go of the blade, it disappears, but
Evoeation eantrip YOllean evoke the blade again as a bonus aetion.

Casting Time: I aetion Vou ean use your aetion to make a melee spel1
Range: 120 feet attaek with the /iery blade. On a hit, the target takes
Components: V, 5 3d6 /ire damage.
Duration: Instantaneous
The flaming blade sheds bright light in a 10.foot
Vou hurl a mote of /ire at a ereature or objeet within radills and dim light for an additional 10 feel.
range. Make a ranged spell attaek against the
targel. On a hit, the target takes IdlO /ire damage. A At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spel1 lIsing a
flammable objeet hit by this spell ignites if it isn't being spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the damage inereases by
worn or earried. Id6 for every two slot leveIs above 2nd.

This spell's damage inereases by IdlO when you reaeh FLAME STRIKE
5th levei (2dlO), 11th levei (3d 10), and 17th levei (4dlO). 5th-levei evocation

FIRE SHIELD Casting Time: I aetion
4th./evel evoeation Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5, M (pineh of sulfur)
Casting Time: I aetion or a /irefly) Duration: Instantaneous
Range: 5elf
Components: V, 5, M (a bit of phosphorus A vertieal column of divine /ire roars down from the
Duration: 10 minutes heavens in a loeation YOllspecify. Eaeh ereature in
a lO.foot.radius, 40.foot-high cylinder eentered on a
Thin and wispy flames wreathe your body for the point within range must make a Dexterity saving throw.
duration, shedding bright light in a 10.foot radius and A ereature takes 4d6 /ire damage and 4d6 radiant
dim light for an additional lO feel. Vou ean end the spell damage on a failed save, or half as mueh damage on a
early by using an aetion to dismiss il. sueeessful one.

The flames provi de YOllwith a warm shield or a ehill At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spel1 using a
shield, as you ehoose. The warm shield grants you spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the /ire damage or the
resistanee to eold damage, and the ehill shield grants radiant damage (your ehoice) inereases by Id6 for eaeh
you resistanee to /ire damage. slot levei above 5th.

In addition, whenever a ereature within 5 feet of you FLAMING SPHERE
hits you with a melee attaek, the shield erupts with 2nd-levei eonjuration
flame. The attaeker takes 2d8 /ire damage from a warm
shield, or 2d8 eold damage from a eold shield. Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 60 feet
FIRE STORM Components: V. 5, M (a bit of tallow, a pineh of
7th./evel evoeation
brimstone, and a dusting of powdered iran)
Casting Time: I aetion Duration: Coneentration, up to I minute
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, 5 A 5-foot.diameter sphere of /ire appears in an
Duration: Instantaneous unoeeupied spaee of your ehoice within range and lasts
for the duration. Any ereature that ends its turn within 5
A storm made up of sheets of roaring flame appears feet of the sphere must make a Dexterity saving thraw.
in a loeation you ehoose within range. The area of the The ereature takes 2d6 /ire damage on a failed save, or
storm eonsists of up to ten 10.foot eubes, whieh you ean half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
arrange as you wish. Eaeh eube must have at least one
faee adjaeent to the faee of another eube. Eaeh ereature As a bonus aetion, you ean move the sphere up to 30
in the area must make a Dexterity saving throw. It feel. If you ram the sphere into a ereature, that ereature
takes 7d 10 /ire damage on a failed save, or half as mueh must make the saving throw against the sphere's
damage on a sueeessful one. damage, and the sphere stops moving this turno

The /ire damages objeets in the area and ignites When you move the sphere, you ean direet it over
flammable objeets that aren't being worn or earried. barriers up to 5 feet tall and jump it aeross pits up to
If you ehoose, plant life in the area is unaffeeted lO feet wide. The sphere ignites flammable objeets not
by this spell. being worn or earried, and it sheds bright light in a
20.foot radius and dim light for an additional 20 feel.

PART 3 I SPELLS


At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a FORBIDDANCE
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by 6th-leveI abjuration (ritual)
Id6 for each slot levei above 2nd.
Casting Time: 10 mlnutes
FLESH TO STONE Range: Touch
6th-leveI transmutation Components: V,S, M (a sprinkling of holy water, rare

Casting Time: I action incense, and powdered ruby worth at least 1,000 gp)
Range: 60 feet Duration: I day
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of lime, water, and earth)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute Vou create a ward against magical traveI that protects
up to 40,000 square feet of floar space to a height of 30
Vou attempt to turo one creature that you can see within feet above the floor. For the duration, creatures can't
range into stone. If the target's body is made of flesh, the teleport into the area or use portais. such as those
creature must make a Constitution saving throw. On a created by the gate spell. to enter the area. The spell
failed save, it is restrained as its Aesh begins to harden. proofs the area against planar travei, and therefore
On a successful save, the creature isn't affected. prevents creatllres from accessing the area by way of
the Astral Plane, Ethereal Plane, Feywild, Shadowfell,
A creature restrained by this spell must make another or the plane shift spell.
Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turos.
lf it successfully saves against this spell three times, the In addition, the spell damages types of crealures thal
spell ends. If it fails its saves three times, it is turoed you choose when you cast it. Choose one or more of the
to stone and subjected to the petrified condition for the following: celestiaIs, elementals, fey,fiends, and undead.
duration. The successes and failures don't need to be When a chosen creature enlers the spell's area for lhe
consecutive; keep track of both until the target collects firsllime on aturo or slarls its luro there, the creature
three of a kind. takes 5d1O radianl or necrotic damage (your choice
when you cast this spell).
lf the creature is physically broken while petrified,
it suffers from similar deformities if it reverts to its When you cast this spell, you can designate a
original state. password. A creature that speaks the password as it
enters the area takes no damage from the spell.
lf you maintain your concentration on this spell for the
entire possible duration, the creature is turoed to stone The spell's area can't overlap with the area of another
until the effect is removed. forbiddance spell. If you cast forbiddance every day for
30 days in the same location, the spell lasts until It is
FLY dispelled, and the material components are consumed
on the last casting.
3rd-Ievel transmutation
FORCECAGE
Casting Time: I action 7th-leveI evocation
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a wing feather from any blrd) Casting Time: I action
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes Range: 100 feet
Components: V, S, M (ruby dllst worth 1,500 gp)
Vou touch a willing creature. The target gains a flying Duration: I hOllr
speed of 60 feet for the duration. When the spell ends,
the target falls if it is still aloft, unless It can stop the falI. An immobile, invisible, cube-shaped prison composed of
magical force springs into existence around an area you
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using choose within range. The prison can be a cage or a solid
a spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, you can target one box, as you choose.
additional creature for each slot levei above 3rd.
A prison in the shape of a cage can be up to 20 feet on
FOG CLOUD a side and is made from 1/2-inch dia meter bars spaced
1st-leveI conjuration 1/2 inch apart.

Casting Time: I action A prison in the shape of a box can be up to 10 feet on
Range: 120 feet a side, creating a solid barrier that prevents any matter
Components: V, S from passing throllgh it and blocking any spells cast into
Duration: Concentration, up to I hOllr or out from the area.

Vou create a 20-foot-radius sphere of fog centered on a When you cast the spell, any creature that is
point within range. The sphere spreads around coroers, completely inside the cage's area is trapped. Creatures
and its area is heavily obscured. It lasts for the duration only partially within the area, or those too large to fit
or until a wind of moderate or greater speed (at least 10 Inside the area, are pushed away from the center of the
miles per hour) disperses it. area until they are completely outside the area.

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a A creature inside the cage can't leave It by nonmagical
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the radius of the fog means, If the creature tries to use teleportation or
increases by 20 feet for each slot levei above 1st. interplanar travei to leave the cage, it must first make a
Charisma saving throw. On a success, the creature can

PART 3 SPELLS


use that magic to exit the cage. On a failure, the creature Components: V, 5. M (a bit of gauze and a
can't exit the cage and wastes the use of the spell or wisp of smoke)
effecl. The cage also extends into the Ethereal Plane,
blocking ethereal traveI. Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour

This spell can't be dispelled by dispel magic. Vou transform a willing creature you touch, along with
everything it's wearing and carrying, into a misty cloud
FORESIGHT for the duration. The spell ends if the creature drops to
9th-leveI divination O hit points. An incorporeal creature isn't affected.

Casting Time: 1 minute While in this form, the target's only method of
Range: Touch movement is a flying speed of 10 feel. The target can
Components: V,5, M (a hummingbird feather) ente r and occupy the space of another creature. The
Duration: 8 hours target has resistance to nonmagical damage, and it has
advantage on 5trength, Dexterity, and Constitution
Vou touch a willing creature and bestow a limited ability saving throws. The target can pass through small holes,
to see into the immediate future. For the duration, the narrow openings, and even mere cracks, though it treats
target can't be surprised and has advantage on attack liquids as though they were solid surfaces. The target
rolls, ability checks, and saving throws. Additionally, can't fali and remains hovering in the air even when
other creatures have disadvantage on attack rolls stunned or otherwise incapacitated.
against the target for the duration.
While in the form of a misty cloud, the target can't talk
This spell immediately ends if you cast it again before or manipulate objects, and any objects it was carrying or
its duration ends. holding can't be dropped, used, or otherwise interacted
with. The target can't attack or cast spells.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
4th-leveI abjuration GATE
9th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch Casting Time: 1 action
Components: V, 5, M (a leather strap, bound around the Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5, M (a diamond worth at least 5.000 gp)
arm or a similar appendage) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Duration: 1 hour
Vou conjure a portallinking an unoccupied space you
Vou touch a willing creature. For the duration, the can see within range to a precise location on a different
target's movement is unaffected by difficult terrain, and plane of existence. The portal is a circular opening,
spells and other magical effects can neither reduce which you can make 5 to 20 feet in diameter. Vou can
the target's speed nor cause the target to be paralyzed orient the portal in any direction you choose. The portal
or restrained. lasts for the duration.

The target can also spend 5 feet of movement to The portal has a front and a back on each plane where
automatically escape from nonmagical restraints, such it appears. Travei through the portal is possible only
as manacles or a creature that has it grappled. Finally, by moving through its fronl. Anything that does so is
being underwater imposes no penalties on the target's instantly transported to the other plane, appearing in
movement or attacks. the unoccupied space nearest to the portal.

FRIENDS Deities and other planar ruIers can prevent portaIs
Enchantmentcantrip created by this spell from opening in their presence or
anywhere within their domains.
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf When you cast this spell, you can speak the name
Components: 5, M (a small amount of makeup applied of a specific creature (a pseudonym, title, or nickname
doesn't work). ]f that creature is on a plane other than
to the face as this spell is cast) the one you are on, the portal opens in the named
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute creature's immediate vicinity and draws the creature
through it to the nearest unoccupied space on your side
For the duration, you have advantage on ali Charisma of the portal. Vou gain no special power over the creature,
checks directed at one creature of your choice that isn't and it is free to act as the DM deems appropriate. lt
hostile toward you. When the spell ends, the creature might leave, attack you, or help you.
realizes that you used magic to influence its mood
and becomes hostile toward you. A creature prone GEAS
to violence might attack you. Another creature might 5th~eveIenchantment
seek retribution in other ways (at the DM's discretion),
depending on the nature of your interaction with il. Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 60 feet
GASEOUS FORM Components: V
3rd-IeveI transmutation Duration: 30 days

Casting Time: 1 action Vou place a magical command on a creature that you
Range: Touch can see within range, forcing it to carry out some

PART 3 I SPELLS


service or refrain fram some action or course of activity GLIBNESS
as you decide. ]f the creature can understand you, it 8th-level transmutation
must succeed on a Wisdom saving thraw or become
charmed by you for the duration. While the creature Casting Time: 1 action
is charmed by you, it takes 5dlO psychic damage Range: Self
each time it acts in a manner directly counter to your Components: V
instructions, but no more than once each day. A creature Duration: 1 hour
that can't understand you is unaffected by the spell.
Until the spell ends, when you make a Charisma
Vou can issue any command you choose, short of an check, you can replace the number you rall with aiS.
activity that would result in certain death. Should you Additionally, no matter what you say, magic that would
issue a suicidal command, the spell ends. determine if you are telling the truth indicates that you
are being truthful.
Vou can end the spell early by using an action to
dismiss it. A remove curse, greater restoration, or wish GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY
spell also ends it. 6th-level abjuration

At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using Casting Time: 1 action
a spell slot of 7th or 8th leveI, the duration is 1 year. Range: Self (lO-foot radius)
When you cast this spell using a spell slot of 9th leveI, Components: V, S, M (a glass or crystal bead that
the spelllasts until it is ended by one of the spells
mentioned above. shatters when the spell ends)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
GENTLE REPOSE
2nd-level necromallcy (ritual) An immobile, faintly shimmering barrier springs into
existence in a lO-foot radius around you and remains for
Casting Time: 1 action the duration.
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of salt and one copper Any spell of 5th leveI or lower cast from outside the
barrier can't affect creatures or objects within it, even
piece placed on each of the corpse's eyes, which must if the spell is cast using a higher leveI spell slot. Such a
remain there for the duration) spell can target creatures and objects within the barrier,
Duration: 10 days but the spell has no effect on them. Similarly, the area
within the barrier is excluded fram the areas affected
Vou touch a corpse or other remains. For the by such spells.
duration, the target is protected from decay and can't
become undead. At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 7th leveI or higher, the barrier blocks spells
The spell also effectively extends the time Iimit on of one levei higher for each slot leveI above 6th.
raising the target from the dead, since days spent under
the influence of this spell don't count against the time GLYPH OF WARDING
limit of spells such as raise dead. 3rd-level abjuration

GIANT INSECT Casting Time: 1 hour
4th-level transmutatioll Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (incense and powdered diamond
Casting Time: 1 action up to 10 minutes
Range: 30 feet worth at least 200 gp. which the spell consumes)
Components: V, S Duration: Until dispelled or triggered
Duration: Concentration,
When you cast this spell, you inscribe a glyph that
Vou transform up to ten centipedes, three spiders, tive harms other creatures, either upon a surface (such as
wasps, or one scorpion within range into giant versions a table or a section of floor or wall) or within an object
of their natural forms for the duration. A centipede that can be closed (such as a book, a scroll, or a treasure
becomes a giant centipede, a spider becomes a giant chest) to conceal the glyph. If you choose a surface, the
spider, a wasp becomes a giant wasp, and a scorpion glyph can cover an area of the surface no larger than
becomes a giant scorpion. 10 feet in dia meter. lf you choose an object, that object
must remain in its place; if the object is moved more
Each creature obeys your verbal commands, and than lO feet from where you cast this spell, the glyph is
in combat, they act on your tum each raund. The DM broken, and the spell ends without being triggered.
has the statistics for these creatures and resolves their
actions and movement. The glyph is nearly invisible and requires a successful
Intelligence (lnvestigation) check against your spell save
A creature remains in its giant size for the duration, DC to be found.
until it draps to O hit points, or until you use an action to
dismiss the effect on it. Vou decide what triggers the glyph when you cast
the spell. For glyphs inscribed on a surface, the most
The DM might allow you to choose different targets. typical triggers include touching or standing on the
For example, if you transform a bee, its giant version glyph, removing another object covering the glyph,
might have the same statistics as a giant wasp. approaching within a certain distance of the glyph, or
manipulating the object on which the glyph is inscribed.
For glyphs inscribed within an object, the most common

PART 3 I SPELLS 245


lriggers include opening lhal objecl, approaching wilhin Vou conjure a vine lhal sprouls from lhe ground in an
a cerlain dislance of lhe objecl, or seeing or reading lhe unoccupied space of your choice lhal you can see wilhin
glyph. Once a glyph is lriggered, lhis spell ends. range. When you casl lhis spell, you can direcl lhe vine
lOlash oul at a crealure wilhin 30 feel of il lhal you can
Vou can furlher retine lhe lrigger so lhe spell aclivales see. Thal crealure musl succeed on a Dexlerily saving
only under cerlain circumslances or according lo lhrow or be pulled 20 feel direclly loward lhe vine.
physical characlerislics (such as heighl or weighl),
crealure kind (for example, the ward could be seI lo Unlil lhe spell ends, you can direcl lhe vine lo lash oul
affecl aberralions or drow), or alignment. Vou can also aI lhe same crealure or anolher one as a bonus aclion
seI condilions for crealures lhal don'l lrigger lhe glyph, on each of your lurns.
such as lhose who say a cerlain password.
GREASE
When you inscribe lhe glyph, choose expiosive runes 1st-levei conjuration
or a spell glyph.
Casting Time: I aclion
Explosive Runes. When lriggered, lhe glyph erupls Range: 60 feet
with magical energy in a 20-fool-radius sphere cenlered Components: V,5, M (a bil of pork rind or butter)
on lhe glyph. The sphere spreads around corners. Each Duration: I minule
crealure in lhe area musl make a Dexlerily saving
lhrow. A crealure takes Sd8 acid, cold, tire, lighlning, or 5lick grease covers lhe ground in a lO-fool square
thunder damage on a failed saving lhrow (your choice cenlered on a poinl wilhin range and lurns il inlo
when you creale the glyph), or half as much damage on a difficull lerrain for lhe duralion.
successful one.
When lhe grease appears, each crealure slanding in
SpelJ Glyph. Vou can slore a prepared spell of ils area musl succeed on a Dexlerity saving lhrow or fali
3rd levei or lower in lhe glyph by casling it as parI prone. A crealure thal enlers lhe area or ends ils lurn
of crealing lhe glyph. The spell musl largel a single lhere musl also succeed on a Dexlerily saving lhrow
crealure or an area. The spell being slored has no or fali prone.
immediale effecl when casl in lhis way. When lhe glyph
is lriggered, lhe slored spell is cast. If lhe spell has a GREATER INVISIBILITY
largel, il largels lhe crealure lhal lriggered lhe glyph. 4th-levei ilIusion
If lhe spell affecls an area, lhe area is cenlered on
lhal crealure. Ir lhe spell summons hoslile crealures Casting Time: I aclion
or creales harmful objecls or lraps, lhey appear as Range: Touch
close as possible lo lhe inlruder and attack it. Ir lhe Components: V.5
spell requires concenlralion, il !asls unlil lhe end of ils Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule
full duralion.
Vou or a crealure you louch becomes invisible unlil lhe
At Higher Leveis. When you casl lhis spell using spell ends. Anylhing lhe largel is wearing or carrying is
a spell slol of 41h levei or higher, lhe damage of an invisible as long as il is on lhe largel's person.
expiosive runes glyph increases by Id8 for each si01
levei above 3rd. If you creale a spell glyph, you can slore GREATER RESTORATlON
any spell of up lo lhe same leve! as lhe si01you use for 5th-ievei abjuration
lhe giyph of warding.
Casting Time: I aclion
GOODBERRY Range: Touch
1st-levei transmutation Components: V,5, M (diamond dusl worlh aI leasl 100

Casting Time: I aclion gp, which the spell consumes)
Range: Touch Duration: Inslanlaneous
Components: V,5, M (a sprig of mistleloe)
Duration: Inslanlaneous Vou imbue a crealure you louch wilh posilive energy lo
undo a debililating effect. Vou can reduce lhe largel's
Up lo len berries appear in your hand and are infused exhauslion leveI by one, or end one of lhe following
wilh magic for lhe duralion. A crealure can use ilS effecls on lhe largel:
aclion to eal one berry. Ealing a berry reslores I hil
poinl, and lhe berry provides enough nourishmenl lo One effecl lhat charmed or pelritied lhe largel
suslain a creature for one day. One curse, including lhe larget's attunemenl lo a
cursed magic ilem
The berries lose lheir polency if lhey have nol been Any reduclion lo one of lhe largel's abilily scores
consumed wilhin 24 hours of lhe casling of lhis spell. One effecl reducing lhe larget's hil poinl maximum

GRASPING VINE GUARDIAN OF FAITH
4th-ievei conjuration 4th-ievei conjuration

Casting Time: I bonus aclion Casting Time: I aclion
Range: 30 feel Range: 30 feel
Components: V, S Components: V
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule Duration: 8 hours

PART 3 I SPELLS A Large speclral guardian appears and hovers for lhe
duralion in an unoccupied space of your choice lhal you


can see within range. The guardian occupies that space Place a suggestion in one location. Vou select an area
and is indistinct except for a gleaming sword and shield of up to 5 feet square, and any creature that enters
emblazoned with the symbol of your deity. or passes through the area receives the suggestion
mentally.
Any creature hostile to you that moves to a space
within lO feet of the guardian for the first time on a The whole warded area radiates magic. A dispel
turn must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw. The magic cast on a specific effect, if successful, removes
creature takes 20 radiant damage on a failed save, or only that effect.
half as much damage on a successful one. The guardian
vanishes when it has dealt a total of 60 damage. Vou can create a permanently guarded and warded
structure by casting this spell there every day
GUARDS AND WARDS for one year.
6th-levei abjuration
GUIDANCE
Casting Time: 10 minutes Divination cantrip
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (burning incense, a small Casting Time: I action up to I minute
Range: Touch
measure of brimstone and oil, a knotled string, a Components: V, S
small amount of umber hulk blood, and a small silver Duration: Concentration,
rod worth at least 10 gp)
Duration: 24 hours Vou touch one willing creature. Once before the spell
ends, the target can roll a d4 and add the number rolled
Vou create a ward that protects up to 2,500 square feet to one ability check of its choice. lt can roll the die before
of floor space (an area 50 feet square, or one hundred or after making the ability check. The spell then ends.
5-foot squares or twenty-five lO-foot squares). The
warded area can be up to 20 feet tall, and shaped as you GUIDING BOLT
desire. Vou can ward several stories of a stronghold by 1st-levei evocation
dividing the area among them, as long as you can walk
into each contiguous area while you are casting the spell. Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
When you cast this spell, you can specify individuais Components: V, S
that are unaffected by any or ali of the effects that Duration: I rOllnd
you choose. Vou can also specify a password that,
when spoken aloud, makes the speaker immune to A flash of light streaks toward a creature of your choice
these effects. within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the
target. On a hit, the target takes 4d6 radiant damage,
Guards and wards creates the following effects within and the next atlack roll made against this target before
the warded area. the end ofyour next turn has advantage, thanks to the
mystical dim light glittering on the target until then.
Corridors. Fog fills ali the warded corridors, making
them heavily obscured. In addition, at each intersection At Higher LeveIs. When YOllcast this spell using a
or branching passage offering a choice of direction, spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by
there is a 50 percent chance that a creature other than Id6 for each slot levei above 1st.
you will believe it is going in the opposite direction from
the one it chooses. GUSTOFWIND
2nd-levei evocation
Doors. Ali doors in the warded area are magically
locked, as if sealed by an arcane lock spell. In addition, Casting Time: I action
you can cover up to ten doors with an illusion (equivalent Range: Self (60-foot line)
to the illusory object function of the minor illusion spell) Components: V, S, M (a legume seed)
to make them appear as plain sections of wall. Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

Stairs. Webs fill ali stairs in the warded area from top Aline of strong wind 60 feet long and 10 feet wide
to botlom, as the web spell. These strands regrow in 10 blasts from you in a direction you choose for the spell's
minutes if they are burned or torn away while guards duration. Each creature that starts its turn in the line
and wards lasts. must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be pushed
15 feet away from you in a direction following the line.
Other SpelJ Effect. Vou can place your choice of one
of the following magical effects within the warded area Any creature in the line must spend 2 feet of
of the stronghold. movement for every I foot it moves when moving
doser to YOU.
Place dancing lights in four corridors. Vou can desig-
nate a simple program that the lights repeat as long as The gust disperses gas or vapor, and it extinguishes
guards and wards lasts. candles, torches, and similar unprotected flames in
Place magic mouth in two locations. the area. It causes protected fiames, such as those of
Place stinking cloud in two locations. The vapors lanterns, to dance wildly and has a 50 percent chance to
appear in the places you designate; they return within extingllish them.
10 minutes if dispersed by wind while guards and
wards lasts. As a bonus action on each of your turns before the
Place a constant gust of wind in one corridor or room. spell ends, you can change the direction in which the
line blasts from you.
PART 3 I SPELLS


HAIL OF THORNS Energy VuInerabiJity. Affected creatures in the area
1st-levei conjuration
have vulnerability to one damage type of your choice,
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self except for bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing.
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute EverIasting Rest. Dead bodies interred in the area

The next time you hit a creature with a ranged weapon can't be turned into undead.
atlack before the spell ends, this spell creates a rain
of thorns that sprouts from your ranged weapon or Extradimensionallnterference. Affected creatures
ammunition. In addition to the normal effect of the
attack, the target of the atlack and each creature within can't move or traveI using teleportation or by
5 feet of it must make a Dexterity saving throw. A
creature takes Id 10 piercing damage on a failed save, ar extradimensional or interplanar means.
half as much damage on a successful one.
Fear. Affected creatures are frightened
At Higher LeveIs. If you cast this spell using a spell
slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by IdlO while in the area.
for each slot leveI above I st (to a maximum of 6d 10).
SiJence. No sound can emanate from within the area,
HALLOW
5th-levei evocation and no sound can reach into it.

Casting Time: 24 hours Tongues. Affected creatures can communicate with
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (herbs, oils, and incense worth at any other creature in the area, even if they don't share a

least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes) common language.
Duration: Until dispelled
HALLUCINATORY TERRAIN
Vou touch a point and infuse an area around it with holy 4th-levei iIIusion
(or unholy) power. The area can have a radius up to 60
feet, and the spell fails if the radius includes an area Casting Time: 10 minutes
already under the effect a hallow spell. The affected area Range: 300 feet
is subject to the following effects. Components: V, S, M (a stone, a twig, and a bit

First, celestiais, elementals, fey, fiends, and undead of green plant)
can't enter the area, nor can such creatures charm, Duration: 24 hours
frighten, or possess creatures within it. Any creature
charmed, frightened, or possessed by such a creature Vou make natural terrain in a 150-foot cube in range
is no longer charmed, frightened, or possessed upon look, sound, and smelllike some other sort of natural
entering the area. Vou can exclude one or more of those terrain. Thus, open fields or a road can be made to
types of creatures from this effect. resemble a swamp, hill, crevasse, or some other difficult
or impassable terrain. A pond can be made to seem
Second, you can bind an extra effect to the area. like a grassy meadow, a precipice like a gentle slope,
Choose the effect from the following list, or choose an or a rock-strewn gully like a wide and smooth road.
effect offered by the DM. Some of these effects apply to Manufactured structures, equipment, and creatures
creatures in the area; you can designate whether the within the area aren't changed in appearance.
effect applies to ali creatures, creatures that follow a
specific deity or leader, or creatures of a specific sort, The tactile characteristics of the terrain are
such as orcs or trolls. When a creature that would be unchanged, so creatures entering the area are likely to
affected enters the spell's area for the first time on a see through the illusion. If the difference isn't obvious
turn or starts its turn there, it can make a Charisma by touch, a creature carefully examining the illusion can
saving throw. On a success, the creature ignores the atlempt an Intelligence (lnvestigation) check against
extra effect until it leaves the area. your spell save DC to disbelieve it. A creature who
discerns the illusion for what it is, sees it as a vague
Courage. Affected creatures can't be frightened image superimposed on the terrain.
while in the area.
HARM
Darkness. Darkness fills the area. Normallight, 6th-levei necromancy
as well as magicallight created by spells of a lower
levei than the slot you used to cast this spell, can't Casting Time: I action
illuminate the area. Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
DayJight. Bright light fills the area. Magical darkness Duration: Instantaneous
created by spells of a lower levei than the slot you used
to cast this spell can't extinguish the light. Vou unleash a virulent disease on a creature that
you can see within range. The target must make a
Energy Protection. Affected creatures in the area Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, it takes
have resistance to one damage type of your choice, 14d6 necrotic damage, or half as much damage on a
except for bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing. successful save. The damage can't reduce the target's
hit points below I. ]f the target fails the saving throw,
its hit point maximum is reduced for I hour byan
amount equal to the necrotic damage it took. Any effect
that removes a disease allows a creature's hit point
maximum to return to normal before that time passes,

PART 3 SPELLS 249
HASTE If a creature is holding or wearing the object and
3rd-/evel transmutation takes the damage from it, the creature must succeed on
a Constitution saving throw or drop the object if it cano lf
Casting Time: 1 action it doesn't drop the object, it has disadvantage on attack
Range: 30 feet rolls and ability checks until the start of your next turno
Components: V,5, M (a shaving of licorice root)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by
Choose a willing creature that you can see within range. ld8 for each sIot leveI above 2nd.
Until the spell ends, the target's speed is doubled, it
gains a +2 bonus to AC, it has advantage on Dexterity HELLISH REBUKE
saving throws, and it gains an additional action on each 1st-/evel evocation
of its turns. That aclion can be used only lo lake the
Attack (one weapon attack only), Dash, Disengage, Hide, Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take in response
or Use an Object aclion. to being damaged bya creature within 60 feet of you
that you can see
When lhe spell ends, the target can't move or take
actions until after its next turn, as a wave of lelhargy Range: 60 feet
sweeps over it. Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
HEAL
6th-levei evocation Vou point your finger, and the creature that damaged
you is momentarily surrounded by hellish flames. The
Casting Time: 1 action creature must make a Dexterity saving throw. It takes
Range: 60 feet 2dlO fire damage on a failed save, or half as much
Components: V, 5 damage on a successful one.
Duration: Instantaneous
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
Choose a crealure lhat you can see within range. A spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by
surge of posilive energy washes through the creature, ldl0 for each slot levei above 1st.
causing it to regain 70 hit points. This spell also ends
blindness, deafness, and any dise ases affecting the HEROES' FEAST
larget. This spell has no effect on conslrucls or undead. 6th-levei conjuration

At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a Casting Time: 10 minutes
spell slol of 7th levei or higher, the amount of healing Range: 30 feet
increases by 10 for each slot leveI above 6th. Components: V,5 , M (a gem-encrusted bowl worth at

HEALING WORD least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes)
1st-levei evocation Duration: Instantaneous

Casting Time: 1 bonus action Vou bring forth a great feast, including magnificent
Range: 60 feet food and drink. The feast takes I hour to consume and
Components: V disappears at the end of that time, and the beneficiai
Duration: Instanlaneous effects don't set in until this hour is over. Up to twelve
other creatures can partake of the feast.
A creature of your choice that you can see within range
regains hit points equal to Id4 + your spellcasting A creature that partakes of the feast gains several
ability modifier. This spell has no effect on undead benefits. The creature is cured of ali diseases and
or constructs. poison, becomes immune to poison and being
frightened, and makes ali Wisdom saving throws with
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a advantage. Its hit point maximum also increases by
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, lhe healing increases by 2dl0, and it gains the same number of hit points. These
ld4 for each slol leveI above 1st. benefits last for 24 hours.

HEAT METAL HEROISM
2nd-levei transmutation 1st-levei enchantment

Casting Time: 1 action Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a piece of iron and a flame) Components: V, 5
Duration: Concenlration, up to 1 minute Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

Choose a manufactured metal object, such as a metal A willing creature you touch is imbued with bravery.
weapon or a suit of heavy or medium metal armor, that Until the spell ends, the creature is immune to being
you can see within range. Vou cause the object to glow frightened and gains temporary hit points equal to
red-hot. Any creature in physical contact with the objecl your spellcasting ability modifier at the start of each
takes 2d8 fire damage when you cast the spell. Until the of its turns. When the spell ends, the target loses any
spell ends, you can use a bonus action on each of your remaining temporary hit points from this spell.
subsequent turns to cause this damage again.

PART 3 I SPEL[,S


At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using HOLY AURA
a spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher. you can target one 8th-leveI abjuration
additional creature for each sIot levei above 1st.
Casting Time: 1 action
HEX Range: Self
1st-leveI enchantment Components: V. S. M (a tiny reliquary worth at least

Casting Time: 1 bonus action 1,000 gp containing a sacred relic, such as a scrap of
Range: 90 feet cloth from a saint's robe or a piece of parchment from
Components: V.S. M (the petrified eye of a newt) a religious text)
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 hour Duration: Concentration. up to 1 minute

Vou place a curse on a creature that you can see within Divine light washes out from you and coalesces
range. Until the spell ends. you deal an extra Id6 in a soft radiance in a 30-foot radius around you.
necrotic damage to the target whenever you hit it with Creatures of your choice in that radius when you cast
an attack. AIso. choose one ability when you cast the this spell shed dim light in a 5-foot radius and have
spell. The target has disadvantage on ability checks advantage on ali saving throws. and other creatures
made with the chosen ability. have disadvantage on attack rolls against them until
the spell ends. In addition, when a fiend or an undead
If the target drops to O hit points before this spell hits an affected creature with a melee attack. the aura
ends. you can use a bonus action on a subsequent turn flashes with brilliant light. The attacker must succeed
of yours to curse a new creature. on a Constitution saving throw or be blinded until
the spell ends.
A remove curse cast on the target ends this spell early.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using HUNGER OF HADAR
a spell slot of 3rd or 4th leveI. you can maintain your 3rd-level conjuration
concentration on the spell for up to 8 hours. When you
use a spell slot of 5th levei or higher. you can maintain Casting Time: 1 action
your concentration on the spell for up to 24 hours. Range: 150 feet
Components: V,S. M (a pickled octopus tentacle)
HOLD MONSTER Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
5th-leveI enchantment
Vou open a gateway to the dark between the stars, a
Casting Time: 1 action region infested with unknown horrors. A 20-foot-radius
Range: 90 feet sphere of blackness and bitter cold appears. centered
Components: V. S. M (a small. straight piece of iron) on a point with range and lasting for the duration. This
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 minute void is filled with a cacophony of soft whispers and
slurping noises that can be heard up to 30 feet away. No
Choose a creature that you can see within range. The light, magical or otherwise, can illuminate the area, and
target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be creatures fully within the area are blinded.
paralyzed for the duration. This spell has no effect on
undead. At the end of each of its turns, the target can The void creates a warp in the fabric of space. and the
make another Wisdom saving throw. On a success. the area is difficult terrain. Any creature that starts its turn
spell ends on the target. in the area takes 2d6 cold damage. Any creature that
ends its turn in the area must succeed on a Dexterity
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using saving throw or take 2d6 acid damage as milky.
a spell slot of 6th levei or higher. you can target one otherworldly tentacles rub against it.
additional creature for each slot leveI above 5th. The
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when HUNTER'S MARK
you target them. 1st-leveI divination

HOLD PERSON Casting Time: 1 bonus action
2nd-leveI enchantment Range: 90 feet
Components: V
Casting Time: 1 action Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S. M (a small, straight piece of iron) Vou choose a creature you can see within range and
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 minute mystically mark it as your quarry. Until the spell ends,
you deal an extra 1d6 damage to the target whenever
Choose a humanoid that you can see within range. you hit it with a weapon attack. and you have advantage
The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw on any Wisdom (Perception) or Wisdom (Survival)
or be paralyzed for the duration. At the end of each of check you make to find it. lf the target drops to O hit
its turns. the target can make another Wisdom saving points before this spell ends. you can use a bonus action
throw. On a success. the spell ends on the target. on a subsequent turn of yours to mark a new creature.

At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, you can target one a spell slot of 3rd or 4th leveI, you can maintain your
additional humanoid for each slot leveI above 2nd. The concentration on the spell for up to 8 hours. When you
humanoids must be within 30 feet of each other when use a spell slot of 5th levei or higher, you can maintain
you target them. your concentration on the spell for up to 24 hours.

PART 3 I SHLLS


HYPNOTIC PATTERN Components: 5, M (a lead-based ink worlh alleast 10
3rd-level iIIusion gp, which the spell consumes)

Casting Time: 1 action Duration: 10 days
Range: 120 feet
Components: 5, M (a glowing stick of incense or a Vou write on parchmenl, paper, or some olher suilable
writing malerial and imbue il wilh a polent illusion lhal
crystal viaI filled with phosphorescent material) lasls for the duralion.
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
To you and any crealures you designate when you
Vou create a twisting pattern of colors that weaves casllhe spell, the writing appears normal, written in
through the air inside a 30-foot cube within range. your hand, and conveys whalever meaning you intended
The pattern appears for a moment and vanishes. Each when you wrole lhe lex!. To ali olhers, lhe writing
creature in the area who sees the pattern must make appears as if il were written in an unknown ar magical
a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature scripllhal is uninlelligible. Alternalively, you can cause
becomes charmed for the duration. While charmed lhe wriling lo appear to be an entire1y differenl message,
by this spell, the creature is incapacitated and has written in a differenl hand and language, lhough lhe
a speed ofO. language must be one you know.

The spell ends for an affected creature if it takes any 5hould the spell be dispelled, the original scripl and
damage or if someone e1se uses an action to shake the the illusion bolh disappear.
creature out of its stupor.
A crealure wilh lruesighl can read the
ICE STORM hidden message.
4th-levei evocation
IMPRISONMENT
Casting Time: 1 action 9th-levei abjuration
Range: 300 feet
Components: V,5, M (a pinch of dust and a few Casting Time: 1 minule
Range: 30 feel
drops of water) Components: V, 5, M (a vellum depiclion or a carved
Duration: Instantaneous
staluette in lhe likeness of the larget, and a special
A hail of rock-hard ice pounds to the ground in a componenllhal varies according lo lhe version of lhe
20-foot-radius, 40-foot-high cylinder centered on a spell you choose, worth at least 500 gp per Hit Die
point within range. Each creature in the cylinder must of lhe target)
make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 2d8 Duration: Until dispelled
bludgeoning damage and 4d6 cold damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. Vou create a magical restraint to hold a creature that
you can see within range. The target must succeed on
Hailstones turn the storm's area of effect into difficult a Wisdom saving throw or be bound by the spell; if it
terrain until the end of your next turno succeeds, it is immune lo this spell if you cast it again.
While affected by this spell, the creature doesn't need
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a to breathe, eat, or drink, and it doesn't age. Divination
spell slot of 5th leveI or higher, the bludgeoning damage spells can't locate or perceive the targe!.
increases by ld8 for each slot levei above 4th.
When you cast the spell, you choose one of the
IDENTIFY following forms of imprisonment.
1st-levei divination (ritual)
Buria/. The target is entombed far beneath the earth
Casting Time: 1 minute in a sphere of magical force that is just large enough to
Range: Touch contain the targe!. Nothing can pass through the sphere,
Components: V,5, M (a pearl worth at least 100 gp and nor can any creature teleport or use planar traveI to get
into or out of i!.
an owl feather)
Duration: Instantaneous The special component for this version of the spell is a
small mithral orb.
Vou choose one object that you must touch throughout
the casting of the spe11.If it is a magic item or some Chaining. Heavy chains, firmly rooted in the ground,
other magic-imbued object, you learn its properties hold the target in place. The target is restrained until
and how to use them, whether it requires attunement the spell ends, and it can't move or be moved by any
to use, and how many charges it has, if any. Vou learn means until then.
whether any spells are affecting the item and what they
are. lf the item was crealed by a spell, you learn which The special component for this version of the spell is a
spell created it. fine chain of precious metal.

lf you instead louch a crealure lhroughoullhe casling, Hedged Prison. The spell transports the target into
you learn whal spells, if any, are currenlly affecting i!. a tiny demiplane that is warded against teleportation
and planar traveI. The demiplane can be a labyrinth, a
ILLUSORY SCRIPT cage, a tower, or any similar confined structure or area
1st-levei iIIusion (ritual) of your choice.

Casting Time: 1 minule The special component for this version of the spell is a
Range: Touch miniature representation of the prison made from jade.

Minimus Containment. The target shrinks to a height
of 1 inch and is imprisoned inside a gemstone ar similar

252 PART 3 I SPELLS


object. Light can pass through the gemstone normally
(allowing the target to see out and other creatures to see
in), but nothing else can pass through, even by means of
teleportation or planar traveI. The gemstone can't be cut
or braken while the spell remains in effcct.

The special component for this version of the spell
is a large, transparent gemstone, such as a corundum,
diamond, or ruby.

Slumber. The target falls asleep and can't be awoken.
The speciai component for this version of the spell
consists of rare soporific herbs.

Ending the Spe/l. During the casting of the spell,
in any of its versions, you can specify a condition that
will cause the spell to end and release the target. The
condition can be as specific or as elaborate as you
choose, but the DM must agree that the condition is
reasonable and has a likelihood of coming to passo The
conditions can be based on a creature's name, identity,
or deity but otherwise must be based on observable
actions or qualities and not based on intangibles such as
levei, class, or hit points.

A dispel magic spell can end the spell only if it is cast
as a 9th.level spell, targeting either the prison or the
special component used to create it.

Vou can use a particular special component to create
only one prison at a time. If you cast the spell again
using the same component, the target of the first casting
is immediately freed fram its binding.

INCENDIARY CLOUD
8th.level conjuration

Casting Time: 1 action up to 1 minute
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration,

A swirling cloud of smoke shot through with white-hot
embers appears in a 20.foot-radius sphere centered on
a point within range. The cloud spreads around corners
and is heavily obscured. It lasts for the duration or until
a wind of moderate or greater speed (at least 10 miles
per hour) disperses it.

When the cloud appears, each creature in it must
make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes IOd8
/ire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one. A creature must also make this saving
throw when it enters the spell's area for the /irst time on
a turn or ends its turn there.

The cloud moves 10 feet directly away from you
in a direction that you choose at the start of each
of your turns.

INFLICT WOUNDS
I st-level necromancy

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous

Make a melee spell attack against a creature you can
reach. On a hit, the target takes 3d1O necrotic damage.

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by
1d 10 for each slot levei above 1sI.


INSECT PLAGUE unbarred. lf the object has multiple locks, only one of
5th-levei conjuration them is unlocked.

Casting Time: 1 action lf you choose a target that is held shut with arcane
Range: 300 feet lock, that spell is suppressed for 10 minutes, during
Components: V,S, M (a few grains of sugar, some which time the target can be opened and shut normally.

kernels of grain, and a smear of fat) When you cast the spell, a loud knock, audible from as
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes far away as 300 feet, emanates from the target objecl.

Swarming, biting locusts fill a 20-foot-radius sphere LEGEND LORE
centered on a point you choose within range, The sphere 5th-levei divination
spreads around corners. The sphere remains for the
duration, and its area is lightly obscured. The sphere's Casting Time: 10 minutes
area is difficult terrain. Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (incense worth at least 250 gp,
When the area appears, each creature in it must
make a Constitution saving throw. A creature takes which the spell consumes, and four ivory strips worth
4d 10 piercing damage on a failed save, ar half as much at least 50 gp each)
damage on a successful one. A creature must also make Duration: Instantaneous
this saving throw when it enters the spell's area for the
first time on a turn ar ends its turn there. Name or describe a person, place, or object. The spell
brings to your mind a brief summary of the significant
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a lore about the thing you named. The lore might consist
spell slot of 6th levei ar higher, the damage increases by of current tales, forgotten stories, or even secret lore
Id 10 for each slot levei above 5th. that has never been widely known. lf the thing you
named isn't of legendary importance, you gain no
INVISIBILITY information. The more information you already have
2nd-leveI ilIusion about the thing, the more precise and detailed the
information you receive is.
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch The information you learn is accurate but might be
Components: V, S, M (an eyelash encased couched in figurative language. For example, if you
have a mysterious magic axe on hand, the spell might
in gum arabic) yield this information: "Woe to the evildoer whose hand
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour touches the axe, for even the haft slices the hand of the
evil ones. Only a true Child of Stone, lover and beloved
A creature you touch becomes invisible until the spell of Moradin, may awaken the true powers of the axe, and
ends. Anything the target is wearing or carrying is only with the sacred word Rudnogg on the lips."
invisible as long as it is on the target's person. The spell
ends for a target that attacks ar casts a spell. LEOMUND'S SECRET CHEST
4th-leveI conjuration
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd levei ar higher, you can target one Casting Time: 1 action
additional creature for each slot levei above 2nd. Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (an exquisite chest, 3 feet by 2 feet
jUMP
1st-levei transmutation by 2 feet, constructed from rare materiaIs worth at
least 5,000 gp, and a Tiny replica made from the same
Casting Time: 1 action materiais worth at least 50 gp)
Range: Touch Duration: Instantaneous
Components: V, S, M (a grasshopper's hind leg)
Duration: 1 minute Vou hide a chest, and ali its contents, on the Ethereal
Plane. Vou must touch the chest and the miniature
Vou touch a creature. The creature's jump distance is replica that serves as a material component for the spell.
tripled until the spell ends. The chest can contain up to 12 cubic feet of nonliving
material (3 feet by 2 feet by 2 feet).
KNOCK
2nd-levei transmutation While the chest remains on the Ethereal Plane, you
can use an action and touch the replica to recall the
Casting Time: 1 action chesl. lt appears in an unoccupied space on the ground
Range: 60 feet within 5 feet of you. Vou can send the chest back to the
Components: V Ethereal Plane by using an action and touching both the
Duration: Instantaneous chest and the replica.

Choose an object that you can see within range. The After 60 days, there is a cumulative 5 percent chance
object can be a door, a box, a chest, a set of manacles, a per day that the spell's effect ends. This effect ends if
padlock, ar another object that contains a mundane or you cast this spell again, if the smaller replica chest is
magical means that prevents access. destroyed, ar if you choose to end the spell as an action.
If the spell ends and the larger chest is on the Ethereal
A target that is held shut bya mundane lock ar that Plane, it is irretrievably losl.
is stuck or barred becomes unlocked, unstuck, or

251 PART 3 I SPELLS


LEOMUNO'S TINY HUT LIGHT
3rd-/evel evocation (ritual) Evocation cantrip

Casting Time: I minute Casting Time: I aetion moss)
Range: Self (I O-foot-radius hemisphere) Range: Toueh
Components: V, S, M (a small crystal bead) Components: V, M (a firelly or phosphorescent
Duration: 8 hours Duration: I hour

A IO-foot-radius immobile dome of force springs into Vou touch one objeet that is no larger than lO feet in any
existenee around and above you and remains stationary dimensiono Until the spell ends, the objeet sheds bright
for the duration. The spell ends if you leave its area. light in a 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional
20 feet. The light ean be eolored as you like. Completely
Nine creatures of Medium size or smaller ean fit inside eovering the objeet with something opaque bloeks the
the dome with you. The spell fails if its area includes a light. The spell ends ifyou east it again or dismiss it
larger ereature or more than nine ereatures. Creatures as an aetion.
and objeets within the dome when you east this spell
ean move through it freely. Ali other ereatures and lf you target an objeet held or worn by a hostile
objeets are barred from passing through it. Spells and creature, that ereature must sueeeed on a Dexterity
other magical effeets ean't extend through the dome or saving throw to avoid the spell.
be east through it. The atmosphere inside the spaee is
eomfortable and dry, regardless of the weather outside. LIGHTNING ARROW
3rd-/evel transmutation
Until the spell ends, you ean eommand the interior to
beeome dimly lit or dark. The dome is opaque from the Casting Time: I bonus aetion
outside, of any eolor you ehoose, but it is transparent Range: Sei f
from the inside. Components: V, S
Duration: Coneentration, up to I minute
LESSER RESTORATION
2nd-leveI abjuration The next time you make a ranged weapon attaek during
the spell's duration, the weapon's ammunition, or the
Casting Time: I aetion weapon itself if it's a thrown weapon, transforms into
Range: Toueh a bolt of lightning. Make the attaek roll as normal. The
Components: V, S target takes 4d8 Iightning damage on a hit, or half
Duration: Instantaneous as mueh damage on a miss, instead of the weapon's
normal damage.
Vou toueh a ereature and ean end either one disease or
one eondition afflieting it. The eondition ean be blinded, Whether you hit or miss, eaeh ereature within 10 feet
deafened, paralyzed, or poisoned. of the target must make a Dexterity saving throw. Eaeh
of these ereatures takes 2d8 lightning damage on a
LEVITATE failed save, or half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
2nd-leveI transmutation
The pieee of ammunition or weapon then returns to
Casting Time: I aetion its normal form.
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (either a small leather loop or a At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the damage for both
pieee of golden wire bent into a eup shape with a long effeets of the spell inereases by Id8 for eaeh slot
shank on one end) leveI above 3rd.
Duration: Coneentration, up to 10 minutes
LIGHTNING BOLT
One ereature or object of your ehoice that you ean see 3rd-/evel evoeation
within range rises vertieally, up to 20 feet, and remains
suspended there for the duration. The spell ean levitate Casting Time: I aetion
a target that weighs up to 500 pounds. An unwilling Range: Self (lOO-foot line)
ereature that sueeeeds on a Constitution saving throw Components: V, S, M (a bit of fur and a rod of amber,
is unaffected.
erystal, or glass)
The target ean move only by pushing or pulling Duration: [nstantaneous
against a fixed objeet or surfaee within reaeh (sueh as
a wall or a eeiling), whieh allows it to move as if it were A stroke of Iightning forming a line 100 feet long and 5
climbing. Vou ean ehange the target's altitude by up to feet wide blasts out from you in a direetion you ehoose.
20 feet in either direetion on your turno lf you are the Eaeh ereature in the line must make a Dexterity saving
target, you ean move up or down as part of your move. throw. A ereature takes 8d6 lightning damage on a
Otherwise, you can use your aetion to move the target, failed save, or half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
whieh must remain within the spelI's range.
The lightning ignites lIammable objeets in the area
When the spell ends, the target lIoats gently to the that aren't being worn or earried.
ground if it is still aloft.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, the damage inereases by
Id6 for eaeh slot levei above 3rd.

PART 3 SPELLS 255


LOCATE ANIMALS OR PLANTS At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spel1 using
2nd-leveI divinatian (ritual) a spell slot of 2nd levei ar higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot leveI above 1st.
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self MAGEARMOR
Components: V,S, M (a bit af fur from a bloodhound) 1st-leveI abjuration
Duration: Instantaneous
Casting Time: 1 action
Describe ar name a specific kind of beast ar plant. Range: Touch
Concentrating on the voice of nature in your Components: V,S, M (a piece of cured leather)
surroundings, you learn the direction and distance to Duration: 8 hours
the closest creature or plant of that kind within 5 miles,
if any are present. Vou touch a willing creature who isn't wearing armor,
and a pratective magical force surrounds it until the
LOCATE CREATURE spel1 ends. The target's base AC becomes 13 + its
4th-leveI divination Dexterity modifier. The spel1 ends if the target dons
armar ar if you dismiss the spell as an action.
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self MAGE HAND
Components: V,S, M (a bit of fur fram a bloodhound) Conjuration cantrip
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Casting Time: 1 action
Describe ar name a creature that is familiar to you. Vou Range: 30 feet
sense the direction to the creature's lacation, as long as Components: V, S
that creature is within 1,000 feet ofyou.lfthe creature Duration: 1 minute
is moving, you know the direction of its mavement.
A spectral, floating hand appears at a point you choose
The spell can locate a specific creature known to within range. The hand lasts for the duration ar until
you, ar the nearest creature of a specific kind (such as you dismiss it as an action. The hand vanishes if it is
a human ar a unicorn), 50 long as you have seen such a ever more than 30 feet away from you ar if you cast
creature up close-within 30 feet-at least once. If the this spel1 again.
creature you described ar named is in a different form,
such as being under the effects of a palymarph spell, Vou can use your action to contraI the hand. Vou can
this spell doesn't locate the creature. use the hand to manipulate an object, open an unlocked
doar ar container, stow or retrieve an item from an open
This spel1 can't locate a creature if running water at container, ar pau r the contents out of a via!' Vou can
least 10 feet wide blocks a direct path between you and move the hand up to 30 feet each time you use it.
the creature.
The hand can't atlack, activate magic items, ar carry
LOCATE OBJECT more than 10 pounds.
2nd-leveI divinatian
MAGIC CIRCLE
Casting Time: 1 action 3rd-Ievel abjuratian
Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (a farked twig) Casting Time: 1 minute
Duration: Cancentration, up to 10 minutes Range: 10 feet
Components: V,S, M (holy water ar powdered
Describe ar name an object that is familiar to you. Vou
sense the direction to the object's location, as lang as silver and iron worth at least 100 gp, which the
that object is within 1,000 feet af you. If the object is in spel1 consumes)
motion, yau know the direction of its movement. Duration: 1 hour

The spell can locate a specific object known to you, Vou create a 10-foot-radius, 20-foot-tal1cylinder of
as long as you have seen it up close-within 30 feet-at magical energy centered on a point on the ground
least once, Alternatively, the spel1 can locate the nearest that you can see within range. Glowing runes appear
abject of a particular kind, such as a certain kind of wherever the cylinder intersects with the lIoor ar
apparel, jewelry, furniture, tool, ar weapon. other surface.

This spel1 can't locate an object if any thickness of Choose one ar more of the following types of
lead, even a thin sheet, blocks a direct path between you creatures: celestiaIs, elementals, fey,fiends, ar undead.
and the object. The circle affects a creature of the chosen type in the
fol1owingways:
LONGSTRIDER
1st-leveI transmutatian The creature can't willingly enter the cylinder by
nonmagical means. If the creature tries to use tele-
Casting Time: 1 action portation ar interplanar traveI to do so, it must first
Range: Touch succeed on a Charisma saving throw.
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of dirt) The creature has disadvantage on attack ral1s against
Duration: 1 hour targets within the cylinder.
Targets within the cylinder can't be charmed, fright-
Vou touch a creature. The target's speed increases by 10 ened, ar possessed by the creature.
feet until the spel1 ends.

PART 3 I SPELLS


When you cast this spell, you can elect to cause its MAGIC MISSILE
magic to opera te in the reverse direction, preventing a Ist./evel evocation
creature of the specified type from leaving the cylinder
and protecting targets outside it. Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a Components: V,S
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, the duration increases by Duration: Instantaneous
1 hour for each slot levei above 3rd.
Vou create three glowing darts of magical force. Each
MAGICJAR dart hits a creature of your choice that you can see
6th./evel necromancy within range. A dart deals Id4 + I force damage to its
target. The darts ali strike simultaneously, and you can
Casting Time: 1 minute direct them to hit one creature or severa!.
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M (a gem, crystal, reliquary, or some At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the spell creates one
other ornamental container worth at least 500 gp) more dart for each slot leveI above 1st.
Duration: Until dispelled
MAGIC MOUTH
Your body falls into a catatonic state as your soulleaves 2nd./evel iI1usion (ritual)
it and enters the container you used for the spell's
material component. While your soul inhabits the Casting Time: 1 minute
container, you are aware of your surroundings as if you Range: 30 feet
were in the container's space. Vou can't move or use Components: V,S, M (a small bit of honeycomb
reactions. The only action you can take is to project your
soul up to 100 feet out of the container, either returning and jade dust worth at least 10 gp, which the
to your living body (and ending the spell) or attempting spell consumes)
to possess a humanoids body. Duration: Until dispelled

Vou can attempt to possess any humanoid within Vou implant a message within an object in range, a
100 feet of you that you can see (creatures warded by a message that is uttered when a trigger condition is met.
protection [rom evil and good or magic circIe spell can't Choose an object that you can see and that isn't being
be possessed). The target must make a Charisma saving worn or carried by another creature. Then speak the
throw. On a failure, your soul moves into the target's message, which must be 25 words or less, though it
body, and the target's soul becomes trapped in the can be delivered over as long as 10 minutes. Finally,
container. On a success, the target resists your efforts determine the circumstance that will trigger the spell to
to possess it, and you can't attempt to possess it again deliver your message.
for 24 hours.
When that circumstance occurs, a magical mouth
Once you possess a creature's body, you control it. appears on the object and recites the message in your
Your game statistics are replaced by the statistics of the
creature, though you retain your alignment and your voice and at the same volume you spoke. Ir the object
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. Vou retain
you chose has a mouth or something that looks like a
the benefit of your own class features. Ir the target has mouth (for example, the mouth of a statue), the magical
mouth appears there so that the words appear to come
any class leveis, you can't use any of its class features. from the object's mouth. When you cast this spell, you
Meanwhile, the possessed creature's soul can can have the spell end after it delivers its message, or
it can remain and repeat its message whenever the
perceive from the container using its own senses, but it trigger occurs.
can't move or take actions at ali.
The triggering circumstance can be as general or as
While possessing a body, you can use your action to detailed as you like, though it must be based on visual
return from the host body to the container if it is within or audible conditions that occur within 30 feet of the
100 feet of you, returning the host creature's soul to object. For example, you could instruct the mouth to
its body. If the host body dies while you're in it, the speak when any creature moves within 30 feet of the
creature dies, and you must make a Charisma saving object or when a silver bell rings within 30 feet of it.
throw against your own spellcasting DC. On a success,
you return to the container if it is within 100 feet of you. MAGIC WEAPON
Otherwise, you die. 2nd./evel transmutation

If the container is destroyed or the spell ends, your Casting Time: 1 bonus action
soul immediately returns to your body. If your body is Range: Touch
more than 100 feet away from you or ifyour body is Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
dead when you attempt to return to it, you die. Ir another
Vou touch a nonmagical weapon. Until the spell ends,
creature's soul is in the container when it is destroyed, that weapon becomes a magic weapon with a +1 bonus
the creature's soul returns to its body if the body is alive to attack rolls and damage rolls.
and within 100 feet. Otherwise, that creature dies.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
When the spell ends, the container is destroyed. spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the bonus increases to
+2. When you use a spell slot of 6th leveI or higher, the
bonus increases to +3. 257

PART 3 I SPELLS


MAJOR IMAGE A f100dof healing energy f10wsfrom you into injured
3rd-Ievel illusion creatures around you. Vou restore up to 700 hit points,
divided as you choose among any number of creatures
Casting Time: I action that you can see within range. Creatures healed by
Range: 120 feet this spell are also cured of ali diseases and any effect
Components: V, S, M (a bit of f1eece) making them blinded or deafened. This spell has no
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes effect on undead or constructs.

Vou create the image of an object, a creature, ar some MASS HEALING WORD
other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a 3rd.level evocation
20.foot cube. The image appears at a spot that you
can see within range and lasts for the duration. lt Casting Time: I bonus action
seems completely real, including sounds, smells, and Range: 60 feet
temperature appropriate to the thing depicted. Vou Components: V
can't create sufficient heat or cold to cause damage, a Duration: Instantaneous
sound loud enough to deal thunder damage or deafen a
creature, or a smell that might sicken a creature (like a As you call out words of restoration, up to six creatures
troglodyte's stench). ofyour choice that you can see within range regain hit
points equal to Id4 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
As long as you are within range of the illusion, you This spell has no effect on undead or constructs.
can use your action to cause the image to move to
any other spot within range. As the image changes At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
location, you can alter its appearance so that its spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, the healing increases by
movements appear natural for the image. For example, Id4 for each slot levei above 3rd.
if you create an image of a creature and move it, you
can alter the image so that it appears to be walking. MASS SUGGESTION
Similarly, you can cause the illusion to make different 6th./evel enchantment
sounds at different times, even making it carry on a
conversation, for example. Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an Components: V,M (a snake's tongue and either a bit of
iIlusion, because things can pass through it. A creature
that uses its action to examine the image can determine honeycomb or a drop of sweet oil)
that it is an iIlusion with a successfullntelligence Duration: 24 hours

(Investigation) check against your spell save De. lf a Vou suggest a course of activity (limited to a sentence
or two) and magically influence up to twelve creatures
creature discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature of your choice that you can see within range and that
can see through the image, and its other sensory can hear and understand you. Creatures that can't be
qualities become faint to the creature. charmed are immune to this effect. The suggestion must
be worded in such a manner as to make the course of
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using action sound reasonable. Asking the creature to stab
a spell slot of 6th leveI or higher, the spelllasts until itself, throw itself onto a spear, immolate itself, or do
dispelled, without requiring your concentration. some other obviously harmful act automatically negates
the effect of the spell.
MASS CURE WOUNDS
5th.level conjuration Each target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
failed save, it pursues the course of action you described
Casting Time: I action to the best of its ability. The suggested course of action
Range: 60 feet can continue for the entire duration. If the suggested
Components: V, S activity can be completed in a shorter time, the spell
Duration: Instantaneous ends when the subject finishes what it was asked to do.

A wave of healing energy washes out from a point of Vou can also specify conditions that will trigger a
your choice within range. Choose up to six creatures special activity during the duration. For example, you
in a 30.foot.radius sphere centered on that point. Each might suggest that a group of soldiers give ali their
target regains hit points equal to 3d8 + your spellcasting money to the first beggar they meet. If the condition isn't
ability modifier. This spell has no effect on undead met before the spell ends, the activity isn't performed.
or constructs.
lf you or any of your companions damage a creature
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a affected by this spell, the spell ends for that creature.
spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the healing increases by
Id8 for each slot levei above 5th. At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a 7th.leveI spell slot, the duration is 10 days. When
MASS HEAL you use an 8th.level spell slot, the duration is 30 days.
9th./evel conjuration When you use a 9th.level spell slot, the duration is a
year and a day.
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet MAZE
Components: V,S 8th./eveI conjuration
Duration: lnstantaneous
Casting Time: I action
PART 3 I SPELLS Range: 60 feet


Components: V, S MENDING
Duration: Concentration, up to \O minutes Transmutation cantrip

Vou banish a creature that you can see within range into Casting Time: 1 minute
a labyrinthine demiplane. The target remains there for Range: Touch
the duration or until it escapes the maze. Components: V. S, M (two lodestones)
Duration: Instantaneous
The target can use its action to altempt to escape.
When it does so, it makes a DC 20 Intelligence check. If This spell repairs a single break or tear in an object
it succeeds, it escapes, and lhe spell ends (a minotallr or you touch, such as a broken chain link. two halves of
goristro demon automatically succeeds). a broken key, a torn c1oak, or a leaking wineskin. As
long as the break or tear is no larger than 1 foot in
When the spell ends, the target reappears in the any dimension, you mend it. leaving no trace of the
space it left or, if that space is occupied, in the nearest former damage.
unoccupied space.
This spell can physically repair a magic item
MELD INTO STONE or construct, but the spell can't restore magic to
3rd-/evel transmutation (ritual) such an object.

Casting Time: 1 action MESSAGE
Range: Touch Transmutation cantrip
Components: V, S
Duration: 8 hours Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Vou step into a stone object or surface large enough to Components: V, S, M (a short piece of copper wire)
fully contain your body, melding yourself and ali the Duration: I round
equipment you carry with the stone for the dllration.
Using your movement, you step into the stone at a point Vou point your finger toward a creature within range
you can touch. Nothing of your presence remains visible and whisper a message. The target (and only the target)
or otherwise detectable by nonmagical senses. hears the message and can reply in a whisper that only
you can hear.
While merged with the stone, you can't see what
occurs outside it, and any Wisdom (Perception) checks Vou can cast this spell through solid objects if you
you make to hear sounds outside it are made with are familiar with the target and know it is beyond
disadvantage. Vou remain aware of the passage of the barrier. Magical silence, 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of
time and can cast spells on yourself while merged in common metal, a thin sheet of lead, or 3 feet of wood
the stone. Vou can use your movement to leave the blocks the spell. The spell doesn't have to follow a
stone where you entered it, which ends the spell. Vou straight line and can travei freely around corners or
otherwise can't move. throllgh openings.

Minor physical damage to the stone doesn't harm METEOR SWARM
you, but its partial destruction or a change in its shape 9th-levei evocation
(to the extent that YOllno longer fit within it) expels YOll
and deals 6d6 bludgeoning damage to YOll.The stone's Casting Time: I action
complete destruction (or transmutation into a different Range: 1 mile
sllbstance) expels YOlland deals 50 bludgeoning damage Components: V, S
to you. If expelled, you fali prone in an lInoccupied space Duration: Instantaneous
cIosest to where you first entered.
Blazing orbs of fire plummet to the ground at four
MELF'S ACID ARROW different points YOllcan see within range. Each creature
2nd-levei evocation in a 40-foot-radius sphere centered on each point you
choose must make a Dexterity saving throw. The sphere
Casting Time: 1 action spreads around corners. A creature takes 20d6 fire
Range: 90 feet damage and 20d6 bludgeoning damage on a failed
Components: V, S, M (powdered rhubarb leaf and an save, or half as much damage on a successful one. A
creature in lhe area of more than one fiery burst is
adder's stomach) affected only once.
Duration: 1nstantaneous
The spell damages objects in the area and ignites
A shimmering green arrow streaks toward a targel flammable objects that aren't being worn or carried.
within range and bllrsts in a spray of acid. Make a
ranged spell attack against the target. On a hit, the MIND BLANK
target takes 4d4 acid damage immediately and 2d4 acid 8th-levei abjuration
damage aI the end of its next turno On a miss, the arrow
splashes the target with acid for half as much of the Casting Time: 1 action
initial damage and no damage at the end of its next turno Range: Touch
Components: V, S
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spellllsing a Duration: 24 hOllrs
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, lhe damage (both initial
and later) increases by 1d4 for each slot levei above 2nd. Unti! the spell ends, one willing creatllre you tOllch is
immune to psychic damage, any effect lhat would sense
259
PART 3 I SPELLS


its emotions or read its thoughts, divination spells, and the illusion's presence, the creature can still physically
the charmed condition. The spell even foils wish spells interact with the illusion.
and spells or effects of similar power used to affect the
target's mind or to gain information about the target. MIRROR IMAGE
2nd-levei illusion
MINOR ILLUSION
lIlusion cantrip Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf
Casting Time: 1 action Components: V,5
Range: 30 feet Duration: 1 minute
Components: 5, M (a bit of fleece)
Duration: 1 minute Three illusory duplicates of yourself appear in your
space. Until the spell ends, the duplicates move with
Vou create a sound or an image of an object within you and mimic your actions, shifting position so it's
range that lasts for the duration. The illusion also ends if impossible to track which image is real. Vou can use
you dismiss it as an action or cast this spell again. your action to dismiss the illusory duplicates.

lf you create a sound, its volume can range from a Each time a creature targets you with an attack during
whisper to a scream. It can be your voice, someone the spell's duration, roll a d20 to determine whether the
else's voice, a lion's roar, a beating of drums, or any attack instead targets one of your duplicates.
other sound you choose. The sound continues unabated
throughout the duration, or you can make discrete lf you have three duplicates, you must roll a 6 or
sounds at different times before the spell ends. higher to change the attack's target to a duplicate. With
two duplicates, you must roll an 8 or higher. With one
lf you create an image of an object-such as a chair, duplicate, you must roll an 11 or higher.
muddy footprints, or a small chest-it must be no larger
than a 5-foot cube. The image can't create sound, light, A duplicate's AC equals 10 + your Dexterity modifier.
smell, or any other sensory effect. Physical interaction If an attack hits a duplicate, the duplicate is destroyed. A
with the image reveals it to be an illusion, because duplicate can be destroyed only by an attack that hits it.
things can pass through it. It ignores ali other damage and effects. The spell ends
when ali three duplicates are destroyed.
lf a creature uses its action to examine the sound or
image, the creature can determine that it is an illusion A creature is unaffected by this spell if it can't see, if it
with a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check relies on senses other than sight, such as blindsight, or
against your spell save De. If a creature discerns the if it can perceive illusions as false, as with truesight.
illusion for what it is, the illusion becomes faint to
the creature. MISLEAD
5th-levei illusion
MIRAGE ARCANE
7th-levei illusion Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf
Casting Time: 10 minutes Components: 5
Range: 5ight Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Components: V,5
Duration: 10 days Vou become invisible at the same time that an illusory
double of you appears where you are standing. The
Vou make terrain in an area up to 1 mile square double lasts for the duration, but the invisibility ends if
look, sound, smell, and even feellike some other sort you attack or cast a spell.
of terrain. The terrain's general shape remains the
same, however. Open fields or a road could be ma de to Vou can use your action to move your illusory double
resemble a swamp, hill, crevasse, or some other difficult up to twice your speed and make it gesture, speak, and
or impassable terrain. A pond can be made to seem like behave in whatever way you choose.
a grassy meadow, a precipice like a gentle slope, or a
rock-strewn gully like a wide and smooth road. Vou can see through its eyes and hear through its ears
as if you were located where it is. On each of your turns
5imilarly, you can alter the appearance of structures, as a bonus action, you can switch from using its senses
or add them where none are present. The spell doesn't to using your own, or back again. While you are using its
disguise, conceal, or add creatures. senses, you are blinded and deafened in regard to your
own surroundings.
The illusion includes audible, visual, tactile, and
olfactory elements, so it can turn clear ground into MISTY STEP
difficult terrain (or vice versa) or otherwise impede 2nd-levei conjuration
movement through the area. Any piece of the illusory
terrain (such as a rock or stick) that is removed from the Casting Time: 1 bonus action
spell's area disappears immediately. Range: 5elf
Components: V
Creatures with truesight can see through the illusion Duration: Instantaneous
to the terrain's true form; however, ali other elements
of the illusion remain, so while the creature is aware of Briefly surrounded by silvery mist, you teleport up to 30
feet to an unoccupied space that you can see.

260 PART 3 I SPELLS


MODIFY MEMORY damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
5th-leveI enehantment successfu I one.

Casting Time: I aetion up to I minute A shapechanger makes its saving throw with
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5 disadvantage. Ir it fails, it also instantly reverts to its
Duration: Coneentration,
original form and can't assume a different form until it
Vou attempt to reshape another ereature's memories. leaves the spell's light.
One ereature that you ean see must make a Wisdom
saving throw. If you are fighting the ereature, it has On each of your turos after you cast this spell, you can
advantage on the saving throw. On a failed save, the use an action to move the beam 60 feet in any direction.
target beeomes eharmed by you for the duration. The
eharmed target is ineapacitated and unaware of its At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
surroundings, though it ean still hear you. If it takes any spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by
damage or is targeted by another spell, this spell ends, ldlO for each slot leveI above 2nd.
and none of the target's memories are modified.
MORDENKAINEN'S FAITHFUL HOUND
While this eharm lasts, you ean affeet the target's 4th-leveI eorijuration
memory of an event that it experieneed within the last
24 hours and that lasted no more than 10 minutes. Vou Casting Time: I action
ean permanently eliminate ali memory of the event, Range: 30 feet
allow the target to reeall the event with perfeet c!arity Components: V, 5, M (a tiny silver whistle, a pieee of
and exaeting detail, ehange its memory of the details of
the event, or ereate a memory of some other event. bone, and a thread)
Duration: 8 hours
Vou must speak to the target to deseribe how
its memories are affeeted, and it must be able to Vou conjure a phantom watchdog in an unoccupied
understand your language for the modified memories to space that you can see within range, where it remains
take root. Its mind fills in any gaps in the details of your for the duration, until you disrniss it as an action, or until
description. If the spell ends before you have fin ished you move more than 100 feet away from it.
describing the modified memories, the creature's
memory isn't altered. Otherwise, the modified memories The hound is invisible to ali creatures except you
take hold when the spell ends. and can't be harmed. When a 5mall or larger creature
comes within 30 feet of it without first speaking the
A modified memory doesn't neeessarily affect how a password that you specify when you cast this spell, the
creature behaves, particularly if the memory contradicts hound starts barking loudly. The hound sees invisible
the creature's natural inc!inations, alignment, or beliefs. creatures and can see into the Ethereal Plane. It
An illogical modified memory, such as implanting a ignores illusions.
memory of how much the creature enjoyed dousing
itself in acid, is dismissed, perhaps as a bad dream. The At the start of each of your turos, the hound attempts
DM might deem a modified memory toa nonsensical to to bite one creature within 5 feet of it that is hostile
affect a creature in a significant manner. to you. The hound's attack bonus is equal to your
spellcasting ability modifier + your proficiency bonus.
A remove eurse or greater restoration spell cast on the On a hit, it deals 4d8 piercing damage.
target restores the creature's true memory.
MORDENKAINEN'S MAGNIFICENT MANSION
At Higher LeveIs. If you east this spell using a spell 7th-leveI eonjuration
slot of 6th leveI or higher, you can alter the target's
memories of an event that took place up to 7 days ago Casting Time: I minute
(6th levei), 30 days ago (7th levei), I year ago (8th levei), Range: 300 feet
or any time in the creature's past (9th levei). Components: V, 5, M (a miniature portal carved from

MOONBEAM ivory, a small piece of polished marble, and a tiny
2nd-leveI evoeation silver spoon, each item worth at least 5 gp)
Duration: 24 hours
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet Vou conjure an extradimensional dwelling in range
Components: V, 5, M (severa I seeds of any moonseed that lasts for the duration. Vou choose where its one
entrance is located. The entrance shimmers faintly
plant and a pieee of opaleseent feldspar) and is 5 feet wide and 10 feet tall. Vou and any creature
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute you designate when you cast the spell can enter the
extradimensional dwelling as long as the portal remains
A silvery beam of pale light shines down in a 5-foot- open. Vou can open or c!ose the portal if you are within
radius, 40-foot-high cylinder centered on a point within 30 feet of it. While c!osed, the portal is invisible.
range. Until the spell ends, dim light fills the cylinder.
Beyond the portal is a rnagnificent foyer with
When a creature enters the spell's area for the first numerous ehambers beyond. The atmosphere is c!ean,
time on aturo or starts its turo there, it is engulfed fresh, and warm.
in ghostly liames that cause searing pain, and it must
make a Constitution saving throw. It takes 2dlO radiant Vou can create any 1I00r plan you like, but the space
can't exceed 50 cubes, each cube being 10 feet on
each side. The place is furoished and decorated as 261
you choose. lt contains sufficient food to serve a nine-
course banquet for up to 100 people. A staff of 100
near-transparent servants attends ali who enter. Vou

PART 3 SPELLS


decide the visual appearance of these servants and their
attire. They are completely obedient to your orders.
Each servant can perform any task a normal human
servant could perform, but they can't attack or take
any action that would directly harm another creature.
Thus the servants can fetch things, clean, mend, fold
clothes. light tires. serve food, pour wine, and so on.
The servants can go anywhere in the mansion but
can't leave it. Furnishings and other objects created
by this spell dissipate into smoke if removed from the
mansion. When the spell ends, any creatures inside
the extradimensional space are expelled into the open
spaces nearest to the entrance.

MORDENKAINEN'S PRIVATE SANCTUM
4th.level abjuration

Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a thin sheet of lead, a piece

of opaque glass. a wad of cotton or cloth, and
powdered chrysolite)
Duration: 24 hours

Vou make an area within range magically secure. The
area is a cube that can be as small as 5 feet to as large
as 100 feel on each side. The spelllasts for the duralion
or unlil you use an aclion to dismiss it.

When you cast the spell, you decide whal sorl of
securily the spell provides, choosing any or ali of the
following properties:

Sound can't pass through lhe barrier aI the edge of
the warded area.
The barrier of the warded area appears dark and foggy,
preventing vision (including darkvision) through il.
Sensors created by divinalion spells can't appear
inside the protected area or pass through the barrier
aI ils peri meter.
Creatures in the area can't be targeted by divinalion
spells.
Nothing can teleport into or oul of lhe warded area.
Planar traveI is blocked within the warded area.

Casling this spell on the same spot every day for a
year makes this effect permanent.

At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slol of 5th levei or higher, you can increase the size
of the cube by 100 feet for each slot leveI beyond 4th.
Thus you could protect a cube that can be up lO 200 feet
on one side by using a spell slot of 5th leveI.

MORDENKAINEN'S SWORD
7th-Je.-el evocalion

Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 60 feet
Componenls: V. 5, M (a minialure platinum sword wilh

a grip and pommel of copper and zinc, worth 250 gp)
Duration: Concentralion, up to 1 minute

Vou create a sword-shaped plane of force that hovers
within range. It lasts for the duration.

When the sword appears, you make a melee spell
attack against a targel ofyour choice within 5 feet ofthe
sword. On a hit. the target takes 3d 10 force damage.

PA RT 3 I SPELLS


Until the spell ends, you can use a bonus action on each Vou place an illusion on a creature or an object
of your turns to move the sword up to 20 feet to a spot you touch so that divination spells reveal false
you can see and repeat this attack against the same information about il. The target can be a willing
target or a different one. creature or an object that isn't being carried or worn by
another creature.
MOVE EARTH
6th-leveI transmutation When you cast the spell, choose one or both of the

Casting Time: 1 action following effects. The effect lasts for the duration. Ir you
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (an iron blade and a small bag cast this spell on the same creature or object every day
for 30 days, placing the same effect on It each time, the
containing a mixture of soils-c1ay, loam, and sand) illusion lasts until it is dispelled.
Duration: Concentration, up to 2 hours
False Aura. Vou change the way the target appears
Choose an area of terrain no larger than 40 feet on a to spells and magical effects, such as detect magic,
side within range. Vou can reshape dirt, sand, or c1ay that detect magical auras. Vou can make a nonmagical
in the area in any manner you choose for the duration. object appear magical, a magical object appear
Vou can raise or lower the area's e1evation, create or fill nonmagical, or change the object's magical aura so that
in a trench, erect or f1atten a wall, or form a pillar. The it appears to belong to a specific school of magic that
extent of any such changes can't exceed half the area's you choose. When you use lhis effect on an object, you
largest dimensiono So, if you affect a 40-foot square, can make the false magic apparent to any creature that
you can create a pillar up to 20 feet high, raise or lower handles the item.
the square's e1evation by up to 20 feet, dig a trench up
to 20 feet deep, and so on. It takes 10 minutes for these Mask. Vou change the way the target appears to spells
changes to complete. and magical effects that detect creature types, such as a
paladin's Divine Sense or the trigger of a symbol spe11.
At the end of every 10 minutes you spend Vou choose a creature type and other spells and magical
concentrating on the spell, you can choose a new area of effects treat the target as if it were a creature of that
terrain to affecl. type or of that alignmenl.

Because the terrain's transformation occurs slowly, OTlLUKE'S FREEZING SPHERE
creatures in the area can't usually be trapped or injured 6th-leveI evocation
by the ground's movemenl.
Casting Time: 1 action
This spell can't manipulate natural stone or Range: 300 feet
stone construction. Rocks and structures shift to Components: V, S, M (a small crystal sphere)
Duration: Instantaneous
accommodate the new terrain. Ir the way you shape
A frigid globe of cold energy streaks from your fingertips
the terrain would make a structure unstable, it to a point of your choice within range, where it explodes
might collapse. in a 60-foot-radius sphere. Each creature within the
area must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
Similarly, this spell doesn't directly affect plant failed save, a creature takes IOd6 cold damage. On a
growth. The moved earth carries any plants along with il. successful save, it takes half as much damage.

NONDETECTlON Ir the globe strikes a body of water or a liquid that is
3rd-Ievel abjuration
principally water (not inc1uding water-based creatures),
Casting Time: 1 action it freezes the liquid to a depth of 6 inches over an area
Range: Touch 30 feet square. This ice lasts for I minute. Creatures
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of diamond dust that were swimming on the surface of frozen water are
trapped in the ice. A trapped creature can use an action
worth 25 gp sprinkled over the target, which the to make a Strength check against your spell save DC
spell consumes) to brea k free.
Duration: 8 hours
Vou can refrain from firing the globe after completing
For the duration, you hide a target that you touch lhe spcll, if you wish. A small globe about the size of
from divination magic. The target can be a willing a sling stone, cool to the touch, appears in your hand.
creature or a place or an object no larger than 10 At any time, you or a creature you give the globe to
feet in any dimensiono The target can't be targeted by can throw the globe (to a range of 40 feet) or hurl it
any divination magic or perceived through magical with a sling (to the sling's normal range). It shatlers
scrying sensors. on impact, with lhe same effect as the normal casting
of the spell. Vou can also set the globe down without
NYSTUL'S MAGIC AURA shattering il. After 1 minute, if the globe hasn't already
2nd-leveI illusion shattered, it explodes.

Casting Time: 1 action At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
Range: Touch spell slot of 7th levei or higher, lhe damage increases by
Components: V, S, M (a small square of silk) ld6 for each slot levei above 6th.
Duration: 24 hours

?ART 3 S?ELLS


OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (Stealth) checks and can't be tracked except by magical
4th-levei evocation means. A creature that receives this bonus leaves
behind no tracks ar other traces of its passage.
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet PASSWALL
Components: V, S, M (a hemispherical piece of 5th-levei transmutation

clear crystal and a matching hemispherical piece Casting Time: I action
of gum arabic) Range: 30 feet
Duration: Concentration. up to I minute Components: V.S. M (a pinch of sesame seeds)
Duration: I hour
A sphere of shimmering force encloses a creature
ar object of Large size ar smaller within range. An A passage appears at a point of your choice that you
unwilling creature must make a Dexterity saving can see on a wooden. plaster. or stone surface (such as
throw. On a failed save. the creature is enclosed for a wall, a ceiling, or a floor) within range, and lasts for
the duration. the duration. Vou choose the opening's dimensions: up
to 5 feet wide. 8 feet tall, and 20 feet deep. The passage
Nothing-not physical objects. energy. ar other spell creates no instability in a structure surrounding it.
effects-can pass through the barrier. in ar out. though
a creature in the sphere can breathe there. The sphere When the opening disappears, any creatures or
is immune to ali damage. and a creature or object inside objects still in the passage created by the spell are safely
can't be damaged by attacks or effects originating from ejected to an unoccupied space nearest to the surface on
outside, nor can a creature inside the sphere damage which you cast the spell.
anything outside it.
PHANTASMAL FORCE
The sphere is weightless and just large enough to 2nd-levei i11usion
contain the creature or object inside. An enclosed
creature can use its action to push against the sphere's Casting Time: 1 action
walls and thus roll the sphere at up to half the creature's Range: 60 feet
speed. Similarly, the globe can be picked up and moved Components: V.S. M (a bit of fleece)
by other creatures. Duration: Concentration. up to I minute

A disintegrate spell targeting the globe destroys it Vou craft an illusion that takes root in the mind of a
without harming anything inside it. creature that you can see within range. The target must
make an Intelligence saving throw. On a failed save, you
OTTO'S IRRESISTIBLE DANCE create a phantasmal object, creature. or other visible
6th-levei enchantment phenomenon of your choice that is no larger than a
lO-foot cube and that is perceivable only to the target
Casting Time: I action for the duration. This spell has no effect on undead
Range: 30 feet ar constructs.
Components: V
Duration: Concentration. up to I minute The phantasm includes sound, temperature. and other
stimuli, also evident only to the creature.
Choose one creature that you can see within range. The
target begins a comic dance in place: shuffling, tapping The target can use its action to examine the phantasm
its feet, and capering for the duration. Creatures that with an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
can't be charmed are immune to this spell. spell save DC. If the check succeeds, the target realizes
that the phantasm is an illusion, and the spell ends.
A dancing creature must use ali its movement to
dance without leaving its space and has disadvantage While a target is affected by the spell, the target treats
on Dexterity saving throws and attack rolls. While the phantasm as if it were real. The target rationalizes
the target is affected by this spell, other creatures any illogical outcomes from interacting with the
have advantage on attack rolls against it. As an phantasm. For example. a target attempting to walk
action, a dancing creature makes a Wisdom saving across a phantasmal bridge that spans a chasm falls
throw to regain control of itself. On a successful save. once it steps anta the bridge. ]f the target survives the
the spell ends. fali, it still believes that the bridge exists and comes up
with some other explanation for its fall-it was pushed,
PASS WITHOUT TRACE it slipped, ar a strong wind might have knocked it off.
2nd-levei abjuration
An affected target is so convinced of the phantasm's
Casting Time: I action reality that it can even take damage from the illusion. A
Range: Self phantasm created to appear as a creature can attack the
Components: V.S, M (ashes from a burned leaf of target. Similarly. a phantasm created to appear as tire. a
pool of acid. ar lava can burn the target. Each round on
mistletoe anel a sprig of spruce) your turn. the phantasm can deal Id6 psychic damage
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour to the target if it is in the phantasm's area ar within 5
feet of the phantasm, provided that the illusion is of a
A veil of shadows and silence radiates from you, creature ar hazard that could logically deal damage.
masking you and your companions from detection. such as by attacking. The target perceives the damage
For the duration. each creature you choose within 30 as a type appropriate to the illusion.
feet of you (including you) has a +10 bonus to Dexterity

PART 3 I SPELLS


PHANTASMAL KILLER us during our foray into the dungeon). Vou must be
abJe to communicate with the creature to bargain for
4th-leveI illusion its services.

Casting Time: 1 action up to 1 minute Payment can take a variety of forms. A celestial might
Range: 120 feet require a sizable donation of gold ar magic items to
Components: V, S an allied temple. while a fiend might demand a living
Duration: Concentration, sacrifice or a gift of treasure. Some creatures might
exchange their service for a quest undertaken by you.
Vou tap into the nightmares of a creature you can see
within range and create an illusory manifestation of its As a rule of thumb, a task that can be measured in
deepest fears, visible only to that creature. The target minutes requires a payment worth 100 gp per minute. A
must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, task measured in hours requires 1,000 gp per hour. And
the target becomes frightened for the duration. At the a task measured in days (up to 10 days) requires 10.000
start of each of the target's turns before the spell ends, gp per day. The DM can adjust these payments based on
the target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw the circumstances under which you cast the spel!. If the
ar take 4d 10 psychic damage. On a successful save, task is aligned with the creature's ethos, the payment
the spell ends. might be halved or even waived. Nonhazardous tasks
typically require only half the suggested payment, while
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a especially dangerous tasks might require a greater gift.
spell slot of 5th levei ar higher, the damage increases by Creatures rarely accept tasks that seem suicida!'
ldlO for each slot levei above 4th.
After the creature completes the task, or when the
PHANTOM STEED agreed-upon duration of service expires, the creature
returns to its home plane after reporting back to you.
3rd-/evel iIIusion (ritual) if appropriate to the task and if possible. ]f you are
unable to agree on a price for the creature's service, the
Casting Time: 1 minute creature immediately returns to its home plane.
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S A creature enlisted to join your group counts as
Duration: 1 hour a member of it, receiving a full share of experience
points awarded.
A Large quasi-real, horselike creature appears on
the ground in an unoccupied space ofyour choice PLANAR BINDING
within range. Vou decide the creature's appearance,
but it is equipped with a saddle, bit. and bridle. Any 5th-leveI abjuration
of the equipment created by the spell vanishes in a
puff of smoke if it is carried more than 10 feet away Casting Time: 1 hour
from the steed. Range: 60 feet
Components: V. S. M (a jewel worth at least 1.000 gP.
For the duration, you or a creature you choose can
ride the steed. The creature uses the statistics for a which the spell consumes)
riding horse, except it has a speed of 100 feet and can Duration: 24 hours
travei 10 miles in an hour, or 13 miles at a fast pace.
When the spell ends. the steed gradually fades. giving With this spell, you attempt to bind a celestial. an
the rider 1 minute to dismount. The spell ends if you use ele mental. a fey. or a fiend to your service. The creature
an action to dismiss it ar if the steed takes any damage. must be within range for the entire casting of the spel!.
(Typically. the creature is first summoned into the center
PLANARALLY of an inverted magie eircle in arder to keep it trapped
while this spell is cast.) At the completion of the casting,
6th-leveI conjuration the target must make a Charisma saving throw. On a
failed save, it is bound to serve you for the duration. If
Casting Time: 10 minutes the creature was summoned ar created by another spell.
Range: 60 feet that spell's duration is extended to match the duration
Components: V, S of this spel!.
Duration: Instantaneous
A bound creature must follow your instructions to the
Vou beseech an otherworldly entity for aid. The being best of its ability. Vou might command the creature to
must be known to you: a god. a primordial, a demon accompany you on an adventure. to guard a location. or
prince, ar some other being of cosmic power. That entity to deliver a message. The creature obeys the letter of
sends a celestial, an elemental. ar a fiend loyal to it to your instructions. but if the creature is hostil e to you. it
aid you, making the creature appear in an unoccupied strives to twist your words to achieve its own objectives.
space within range. Ifyou know a specific crcature's ]f the creature carries out your instructions completely
name. you can speak that name when you cast this spell before the spell ends, it travels to you to report this fact
to request that creature, though you might get a different if you are on the same plane of existence. If you are on a
creature anyway (DM's choice). different plane of existence. it returns to the place where
you bound it and remains there until the spell ends.
When the creature appears. it is under no compulsion
to behave in any particular way. Vou can ask the At Higher Leve/s. When YOllcast this spellllsing a
creature to perform a service in exchange for payment, spell slot of a higher levei, the duration increases to 10
but it isn't obligcd to do so. The rcquested task could days with a 6th-levei slot, to 30 days with a 7th-levei slot.
range from simple (fly us across the chasm, or hclp us to 180 days with an 8th-levei slot. and to a year and a
fight a battle) to complex (spy on our enemies. or protect day with a 9th-levei spell slot.

PART 3 I SPELLS


PLANE SHIFT Vou extend your hand toward a creature you can see
7th-levei conjuration within range and project a puff of noxious gas from your
paIm. The creature must succeed on a Constitution
Casting Time: I action saving throw ar take Idl2 poison damage.
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a forked, metal rod worth at least This spell's damage increases by Idl2 when you reach
5th leveI (2dI2), 11th levei (3dI2), and 17th leveI (4dI2).
250 gp, attuned to a particular plane of existence)
Duration: Instantaneous POLYMORPH
4th-levei transmutation
Vou and up to eight willing creatures who link hands in
a circle are transported to a different plane of existence. Casting Time: I action
Vou can specify a target destination in general terms, Range: 60 feet
such as the City of Brass on the Elemental Plane of Components: V, S, M (a caterpillar cocoon)
Fire or the palace of Dispater on the second levei of the Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Nine Hells, and you appear in or near that destination.
Ir you are trying to reach the City of Brass, for example, This spell transforms a creature that you can see
you might arrive in its Street of Steel, before its Gate of within range into a new formoAn unwilling creature
Ashes, or looking at the city from across the Sea of Fire, must make a Wisdom saving throw to avoid the
at the DM's discretion. effect. A shapechanger automatically succeeds on this
saving throw.
Alternatively, if you know the sigil sequence of a
teleportation circle on another plane of existence, this The transformation lasts for the duration, or until
spell can take you to that circle. Ir the teleportation the target drops to O hit points ar dies. The new form
circle is too small to hold ali the creatures you can be any beast whose challenge rating is equal to or
transported, they appear in the closest unoccupied less than the target's (or the target's leveI, if it doesn't
spaces next to the circle. have a challenge rating). The target's game statistics,
including mental ability scores, are replaced by the
Vou can use this spell to banish an unwilling creature statistics of the chosen beast. It retains its alignment
to another plane. Choose a creature within your reach and personality.
and make a melee spell attack against it. On a hit, the
creature must make a Charisma saving throw. Ir the The target assumes the hit points of its new formo
creature fails this save, it is transported to a random When it reverts to its normal form, the creature
location on the plane of existence you specify. A creature returns to the number of hit points it had before it
so transported must find its own way back to your transformed. If it reverts as a result of dropping to
current plane of existence. O hit points, any excess damage carries over to its
normal formoAs long as the excess damage doesn't
PLANT GROWTH reduce the creature's normal form to O hit points, it isn't
3rd-/evel transmutation knocked unconscious.

Casting Time: I action or 8 hours The creature is limited in the actions it can perform by
Range: 150 feet the nature of its new form, and it can't speak, cast spells,
Components: V,S ar take any other action that requires hands ar speech.
Duration: lnstantaneous
The target's gear melds into the new formoThe
This spell channels vitality into plants within a specific creature can't activate, use, wield, or otherwise benefit
area. There are two possible uses for the spell, granting from any of its equipment.
either immediate or long-term benefits.
POWER WORD HEAL
If you cast this spell using I action, choose a point 9th-levei evocation
within range. Ali normal plants in a 100-foot radius
centered on that point become thick and overgrown. A Casting Time: I action
creature moving through the area must spend 4 feet of Range: Touch
movement for every I foot it moves. Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou can exclude one or more areas of any size within
the spell's area from being affected. A wave of healing energy washes over the creature
you touch. The target regains ali its hit points. If the
If you cast this spell over 8 hours, you enrich the creature is charmed, frightened, paralyzed, ar stunned,
land. Ali plants in a half-mile radius centered on a point the condition ends. If the creature is prone, it can use its
within range beco me enriched for I year. The plants reaction to stand up. This spell has no effect on undead
yield twice the normal amount of food when harvested. ar constructs.

POISON SPRAY POWER WORD KILL
Conjuration cantrip 9th-levei enchantment

Casting Time: I action Casting Time: I action
Range: 10 feet Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous Duration: Instantaneous

266 PART 3 I SPELLS


Vou utter a word of power that can compel one creature PRISMATIC SPRAY
you can see within range to die instantly. lf the 7th.level evocation
creature you choose has 100 hit points or fewer. it dies.
Otherwise. the spell has no effect. Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (60-foot cone)
POWER WORD STUN Components: V.S
8th-levei enchantment Duration: Instantaneous

Casting Time: I action Eight multicolored rays of light flash fram your hand.
Range: 60 feet Each ray is a different color and has a different power
Components: V and purpose. Each creature in a 60-foot cone must
Duration: Instantaneous make a Dexterity saving thraw. For each target. roll a d8
to determine which color ray affects il.
Vou speak a word of power that can overwhelm the
mind of one creature you can see within range. leaving 1. Red. The target takes IOd6 tire damage on a failed
it dumbfounded. lf the target has 150 hit points or fewer. save. or half as much damage on a successful one.
it is stunned. Otherwise. the spell has no effect.
2. Orange. The target takes IOd6 acid damage on a
The stunned target must make a Constitution saving failed save. or half as much damage on a successful one.
thraw at the end of each of its turns. On a successful
save. this stunning effect ends. 3. Yellow. The target takes IOd6lightning damage on a
failed save. or half as much damage on a successful one.
PRAYER OF HEALING
2nd-leveI evocation 4. Green. The target takes IOd6 poison damage on a
failed save. or half as much damage on a successful one.
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 30 feet 5. B/ue. The target takes IOd6 cold damage on a failed
Components: V save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Duration: Instantaneous
6.Indigo. On a failed save. the target is restrained.
Up to six creatures of your choice that you can see lt must then make a Constitution saving thraw at the
within range each regain hit points equal to 2d8 + your end of each of its turns. If it successfully saves three
spellcasting ability moditier. This spell has no effect on times. the spell ends. If it fails its save three times.
undead or constructs. it permanently turns to stone and is subjected to the
petritied condition. The successes and failures don't
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a need to be consecutive; keep track of both until the
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher. the healing increases by target collects three of a kind.
ld8 for each slot leveI above 2nd.
7. Vio/et, On a failed save, the target is blinded. lt
PRESTIDIGITATION must then make a Wisdom saving throw at the start of
Transmutation cantrip your next turno A successful save ends the blindness. lf
it fails that save, the creature is transported to another
Casting Time: 1 action plane of existence of the DM's choosing and is no longer
Range: 10 feet blinded. (Typically, a creature that is on a plane that isn't
Components: V.S its home plane is banished home. while other creatures
Duration: Up to I hour are usually cast into the Astral or Ethereal planes.)

This spell is a minor magical trick that novice 8. Specia/. The target is struck by two rays. Roll twice
spellcasters use for practice. Vou create one of the more, rerolling any 8.
following magical effects within range:
PRISMATIC WALL
Vou create an instantaneous. harmless sensory effect. 9th-leveI abjuration
such as a shower of sparks. a puff of wind. faint musi-
cal notes. or an odd odor. Casting Time: 1 action
Vou instantaneously light or snuff out a candle. a Range: 60 feet
torch. or a small camptire. Components: V. S
Vou instantaneously dean or soil an object no larger Duration: 10 minutes
than 1 cubic fool.
Vou chill. warm. or flavor up to I cubic foot of nonliv- A shimmering, multicolored plane of light forms a
ing material for I hour. vertical opaque wall-up to 90 feet long. 30 feet high.
Vou make a color. a small mark. or a symbol appear and I inch thick-centered on a point you can see
on an object ar a surface for I hour. within range. Alternatively, you can shape the wall into
Vou create a nonmagical trinket or an iIlusory image a sphere up to 30 feet in dia meter centered on a point
that can tit in your hand and that lasts until the end of you choose within range. The wall remains in place for
your next turno the duration.lfyou position the wall so that it passes
through a space occupied by a creature. the spell fails.
lfyou cast this spell multiple times. YOll can have IIp to and your action and the spell slot are wasted.
three of its non-instantaneous effects aclive at a time.
and you can dismiss such an effect as an action. The wall sheds bright light out to a range of 100
feet and dim light for an additional 100 feel. Vou and
creatures you designate at the lime you cast the spell
can pass through and remain near the wall without
harm. If another creature that can see the wall moves to
within 20 feet of it or starts its tum there. the creature

PART 3 I SPELLS


must succeed 00 a Coostitutioo saviog throw or become PRODUCE FLAME
blioded for I mioute. Conjuration cantrip

The wall coosists of seveo layers. each with a differeot Casting Time: I actioo
color. Wheo a creature attempts to reach ioto or pass Range:Self
through the wall, it does so ooe layer at a time through Components: V,S
ali the wall's layers. As it passes or reaches through Duration: lO mioutes
each layer, the creature must make a Dexterity saviog
throw or be affected by that layer's properties as A flickeriog flame appears io your hand. The flame
described below. remaios there for the duration aod harms oeither you
oor your equipmeot. The flame sheds bright light in a
The wall cao be destroyed, also ooe layer at a time, io 10-foot radius aod dim light for an additiooal 10 feet.
order from red to violet, by meaos specific to each layer. The spell ends if you dismiss it as ao action or if you
Ooce a layer is destroyed, it remaios so for the duratioo cast it again.
of the spell. A rod of cancellation destroys a prismatic
wall, but ao antimagic field has 00 effect 00 it. Vou cao also attack with the flame, although doing so
eods the spell. Wheo you cast this spell, or as ao action
1. Red. The creature takes IOd6 fire damage 00 a 00 a later turn, you cao hurl the flame at a creature
failed save, or half as much damage 00 a successful ooe. withio 30 feet of you. Make a raoged spell attack. 00 a
While this layer is io place, ooomagical raoged attacks hit, the target takes Id8 fire damage.
cao't pass through the wall. The layer cao be destroyed
by dealiog at least 25 cold damage to it. This spell's damage iocreases by Id8 wheo you reach
5th levei (2d8), 11th levei (3d8), aod 17th levei (4d8).
2. Orange. The creature takes IOd6 acid damage 00
a failed save, or half as much damage 00 a successful PROGRAMMED ILLUSION
ooe. While this layer is io place, magical raoged attacks 6th.level illusion
cao't pass through the wall. The layer is destroyed by
a stroog wiod. Casting Time: I actioo
Range: 120 feet
3. YeJIow. The creature takes lOd6 lightoiog damage Components: V,S, M (a bit of fleece and jade dust worth
00 a failed save, or half as much damage 00 a successful
ooe. This layer cao be destroyed by dealiog at least 60 at least 25 gp)
force damage to it. Duration: Until dispelled

4. Green. The creature takes lOd6 poisoo damage 00 Vou create ao ilIusioo of ao object, a creature, ar
a failed save, ar half as much damage 00 a successful some other visible pheoomeooo within raoge that
ooe. A passwall spell, or aoother spell of equal or activates wheo a specific cooditioo occurs. The ilIusioo
greater levei that cao opeo a portal 00 a solid surface, is imperceptible uotil theo. 11 must be 00 larger thao a
destrays this layer. 30-foot cube, aod you decide wheo you cast the spell
how the illusioo behaves aod what souods it makes. This
5. Blue. The creature takes IOd6 cold damage 00 a scripted performaoce cao last up to 5 mioutes.
failed save, or half as much damage 00 a successful ooe.
This layer cao be destroyed by dealiog at least 25 fire Wheo the cooditioo you specify occurs, the illusioo
damage to it. spriogs ioto existeoce aod performs io the maooer you
described. Ooce the ilIusioo fioishes performiog, it
6. Jndigo. 00 a failed save, the creature is restraioed. disappears aod remaios dormaot for 10 mioutes. After
11 must theo make a Coostitutiao saviog throw at the this time, the ilIusioo cao be activated agaio.
eod of each of its turns. lf it successfully saves three
times, the spell eods. lf it fails its save three times, The triggeriog cooditioo cao be as geoeral or as
it permaoeotly turos to stooe aod is subjected to the detailed as you like, though it must be based 00 visual or
petrified cooditioo. The successes aod failures doo't audible cooditioos that occur withio 30 feet of the area.
need to be coosecutive; keep track of both uotil the For example, you could create ao illusioo of yourself
creature collects three of a kiod. to appear aod warn off others who attempt to opeo a
trapped door, or you could set the illusioo to trigger ooly
While this layer is io place, spells cao't be cast wheo a creature says the correct word or phrase.
through the wall. The layer is destroyed by bright light
shed by a day/ight spell or a similar spell of equal or Physical ioteractioo with the image reveals it to be ao
higher leveI. illusioo, because thiogs cao pass through it. A creature
that uses its actioo to examioe the image cao determioe
7. Violet. 00 a failed save, the creature is blioded. 11 that it is ao illusioo with a successfullotelligeoce
must theo make a Wisdom saviog throw at the start of (f ovestigatioo) check agaiost your spell save DC. lf a
your oext turno A successful save eods the bliodoess. lf creature discerns the illusioo for what it is, the creature
it fails that save, the creature is traosported to aoother cao see through the image, aod aoy noise it makes
plaoe of the DM's choosiog aod is 00 looger blioded. souods hollow to the creature.
(Typically,a creature that is 00 a plaoe that iso't its
home plaoe is baoished home, while other creatures
are usually cast ioto the Astral or Ethereal plaoes.) This
layer is destroyed bya dispel magic spell or a similar
spell of equal or higher leveI that cao eod spells aod
magical effects.

PART 3 I SPELLS


PROJECT IMAGE PROTECTlON FROM POISON
7th-levei iIlusion 2nd-levei abjuration

Casting Time: 1 action Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 500 miles Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a small replica of you made from Components: V,S
Duration: I hour
materiais worth at least 5 gp)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 day Vou touch a creature. If it is poisoned, you neutralize the
poison, If more than one poison afllicts the target, you
Vou create an illusory copy of yourself that lasts for neutralize one poison that you know is present, or you
the duration. The copy can appear at any location neutralize one at random,
within range that you have seen before, regardless of
intervening obstacles. The illusion Iooks and sounds For the duration, the target has advantage on saving
throws against being poisoned, and it has resistance to
like you but is intangible. Ir the illusion takes any poison damage.

damage, it disappears, and the spell ends. PURIFY FOOD AND DRINK
Vou can use your action to move this illusion up to 1st-levei transmutation (ritual)

twice your speed, and make it gesture, speak, and Casting Time: 1 action
behave in whatever way you choose. It mimics your Range: 10 feet
mannerisms perfectly. Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou can see through its eyes and hear through its
ears as if you were in its space. On your turn as a bonus Ali nonmagical food and drink within a 5-foot-radius
action, you can switch from using its senses to using sphere centered on a point of your choice within range is
your own, or back again. While you are using its senses, purified and rendered free of poison and disease.
you are blinded and deafened in regard to your own
surroundings. RAISE DEAD
5th-levei necromancy
Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an
illusion, because things can pass through it. A creature Casting Time: I hour
that uses its action to examine the image can determine Range: Touch
that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence Components: V,S, M (a diamond worth at least 500 gp,
(Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If a
creature discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature which the spell consumes)
can see through the image, and any noise it makes Duration: Instantaneous
sounds hollow to the creature.
Vou return a dead creature you touch to life, provided
PROTECTION FROM ENERGY
3rd-/evel abjuration that it has been dead no longer than 10 days. Ir the

Casting Time: 1 action creature's soul is both willing and at liberty to rejoin the
Range: Touch body, the creature returns to life with I hit poinl.
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour This spell also neutralizes any poisons and cures
nonmagical diseases that affected the creature at the
For the duration, the willing creature you touch has time it died. This spell doesn't, however, remove magical
resistance to one damage type of your choice: acid, cold, diseases, curses, or similar effects; if these aren't first
fire, lightning, or thunder. removed prior to casting the spell, they take effect when
the creature returns to life. The spell can't return an
PROTECTION FROM EVIL AND GOOD undead creature to life.
1st-levei abjuration
This spell closes ali mortal wounds, but it doesn't
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch restore missing body parts. Ir the creature is lacking
Components: V, S, M (holy water or powdered silver
body parts or organs integral for its survival-its head,
and iron, which the spell consumes) for instance-the spell automatically fails.
Duration: Concentration up to 10 minutes
Coming back from the dead is an ordeal. The target
Until the spell ends, one willing creature you takes a -4 penalty to ali attack rolls, saving throws, and
touch is protected against certain types of ability checks. Every time the target finishes a long rest,
creatures: aberrations, celestiais, elementals, fey, the penalty is reduced by 1 until it disappears.
fiends, and undead.
RARY'S TELEPATHIC BOND
The protection grants several benefits. Creatures of 5th-levei divination (ritual)
those types have disadvantage on attack rolls against
the targel. The target also can't be charmed, frightened, Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
or possessed by them. Ir the target is already charmed, Components: V, S, M (pieces of eggshell from two

frightened, or possessed by such a creature, the target different kinds of creatures)
has advantage on any new saving throw against the Duration: I hour
relevant effecl.
Vou forge a telepathic link among up to eight willing
creatures of your choice within range, psychically

270 PART 3 I SPELLS


linking each creature to all the others for the duration. Vou touch a creature and stimulate its natural healing
Creatures with Intelligence scores of 2 ar less aren't ability. The target regains 4d8 + 15 hit points. For the
affected by this spell. duration of the spell, the target regains I hit point at the
start of each of its turns (10 hit points each minute).
Until the spell ends, the targets can communicate
telepathically thraugh the bond whether ar not they have The target's severed body members (fingers, legs,
a common language. The communication is possible tails, and so on), if any, are restored after 2 minutes.
over any distance, though it can't extend to other planes If you have the severed part and hold it to the stump,
of existence. the spell instantaneously causes the limb to knit
to the stump.

RAY OF ENFEEBLEMENT REINCARNATE
2nd./evel necromancy 5th./evel transmutation

Casting Time: 1 action up to 1 minute Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: 60 feet Range: Touch
Components: V, 5 Components: V, 5, M (rare oils and unguents worth at
Duration: Concentration,
least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes)
A black beam of enervating energy springs fram your Duration: Instantaneous
finger toward a creature within range. Make a ranged
spell attack against the target. On a hit, the target deals Vou touch a dead humanoid ar a piece of a dead
only half damage with weapon attacks that use 5trength humanoid. Provided that the creature has been dead no
until the spell ends. longer than 10 days, the spell forms a new adult body
for it and then calls the soul to enter that body. If the
At the end of each of the target's turns, it can make target's soul isn't free or willing to do so, the spell fails.
a Constitution saving throw against the spell. On a
success, the spell ends. The magic fashions a new body for the creature
to inhabit, which likely causes the creature's race to
RAY OF FROST change. The DM rolls a dlOO and consults the following
Evocation cantrip table to determine what form the creature takes when
restored to life, ar the DM chooses a formo
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet dlOO Raee
Components: V, 5 01-04 Dragonborn
Duration: Instantaneous 05-13 Dwarf, hill
14-21 Dwarf, mountain
A frigid beam of blue-white light streaks toward a 22-25 Elf, dark
creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack 26-34 Elf, high
against the target. On a hit, it takes ld8 cold damage, 35-42 Elf, wood
and its speed is reduced by 10 feet until the start of 43-46 Gnome, forest
your next turno 47-52 Gnome, rock
53-56 Half.elf
The spell's damage increases by Id8 when you reach 57-60 Haif.ore
5th levei (2d8), 11th levei (3d8), and 17th levei (4d8). 61-68 Halfiing,lightfoot
69-76 Haifiing, stout
RAY OF SICKNESS 77-96 Human
1st-leveI necromancy 97-00 Tiefiing

Casting Time: I action The reincarnated creature recalls its former life
Range: 60 feet and experiences. It retains the capabilities it had in its
Components: V, 5 original form, except it exchanges its original race for
Duration: Instantaneous the new one and changes its racial traits accordingly.

A ray of sickening greenish energy lashes out toward REMOVE CURSE
a creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack 3rd./evel abjuration
against the target. On a hit, the target takes 2d8 poison
damage and must make a Constitution saving throw. Casting Time: 1 action
On a failed save, it is also poisoned until the end of Range: Touch
your next turno Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei ar higher, the damage increases by At your touch, all curses affecting one creature ar
ld8 for each slot levei above 1st. object end. If the object is a cursed magic item, its curse
remains, but the spell breaks its owner's attunement to
REGENERATE the object so it can be removed ar discarded.
7th-levei transmutation

Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a prayer wheel and holy water)
Duration: 1 hour

P\RT 3 SPELLS 2~1


RESlSTANCE REVIVIFY
Abjuration cantrip 3rd-level conjuration

Casting Time: I action Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a minialure doak) Components: V,S, M (diamonds worlh 300 gp, which
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule
lhe spell consumes)
Vou louch one willing crealure. Once before lhe spell Duration: Inslanlaneous
ends, lhe largel can roll a d4 and add lhe number
ralled lo one saving lhraw of ils choice. It can rall Vou louch a crealure lhal has died wilhin lhe lasl
lhe die before or afler making lhe saving lhraw. The minule. Thal crealure relurns lo life wilh I hil poinl.
spelllhen ends. This spell can'l relurn lo life a crealure lhal has died of
old age, nor can il reslore any missing body parIs.

RESURRECTION ROPE TRICK
7th-leveI necromancy 2nd-leveI transmutation

Casting Time: I hour 1,000 Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a diamond worlh alleasl Components: V, S, M (powdered corn exlracl and a

gp, which lhe spell consumes) lwisted loop of parchmenl)
Duration: Inslanlaneous Duration: I hour

Vou louch a dead crealure lhal has been dead for no Vou touch a length of rape lhat is up lo 60 feellong.
more than a cenlury, lhal didn'l die of old age, and lhal One end of lhe rope then rises inlo lhe air unlillhe
isn'l undead. If ilS soul is free and willing, lhe largel whole rope hangs perpendicular lo lhe ground. AI lhe
relurns lo life with ali ils hil poinls. upper end of the rope, an invisible enlrance opens lo an
exlradimensional space lhallasls unlillhe spell ends.
This spell neulralizes any poisons and cures normal
diseases affticling lhe creature when il died. It doesn'l, The extradimensional space can be reached by
however, remove magical diseases. curses, and lhe like; dimbing lo lhe top of lhe rope. The space can hold as
if such effecls aren'l removed prior lo casling the spell, many as eighl Medium or smaller creatures. The rope
lhey affticl lhe largel on ils relurn lo life. can be pulled inlo lhe space, making lhe rape disappear
from view oulside lhe space,
This spell doses ali morlal wounds and reslores any
missing body paris. Allacks and spells can'l crass lhrough lhe enlrance
into or oul of lhe exlradimensional space, bullhose
Coming back from lhe dead is an ordeal. The largel inside can see oul of il as if lhrough a 3-foOl-by-5-fool
lakes a -4 penally lOali allack rolls, saving lhrows, and window cenlered on lhe rope.
abilily checks. Every lime lhe largel finishes a long resl,
the penally is reduced by I unlil il disappears. Anylhing inside lhe exlradimensional space drops oul
when lhe spell ends.
Casling lhis spelllo reslore life lOa crealure lhat has
been dead for one year or longer laxes you greally. Unlil SACRED FLAME
you finish a long resl, you can'l casl spells again, and Evocation cantrip
you have disadvanlage on ali allack rolls, abilily checks,
and saving lhrows. Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feel
REVERSE GRAVITY Components: V, S
Duration: Inslanlaneous
7th-leveI transmutation
Flame.like radiance descends on a creature lhal you
Casting Time: I aclion can see wilhin range. The largel musl succeed on a
Range: 100 feel Dexterily saving throw or take Id8 radianl damage. The
Components: V, S, M (a lodeslone and iran filings) largel gains no benefil from cover for lhis saving lhrow.
Duration: Concenlralion, up lO I minule
The spell's damage increases by Id8 when you reach
This spell reverses gravily in a 50-fool-radius, 100- 51h levei (2d8), Illh levei (3d8), and 171hleveI (4d8).
fool high cylinder cenlered on a poinl wilhin range. Ali
crealures and objecls thal aren'l somehow anchored lo SANCTUARY
the ground in lhe area fali upward and reach lhe lop of Ist./evel abjuration
lhe area when you casllhis spell. A crealure can make a
Dexlerily saving thraw lo grab onlo a fixed objecl il can Casting Time: I bonus aclion
reach, lhus avoiding lhe falI. Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (a small silver mirror)
lf some solid objecl (such as a ceiling) is encounlered Duration: I minule
in lhis fali, faIling objecls and crealures slrike il juSl as
lhey would during a normal downward falI. If an objecl Vou ward a crealure within range againsl allack. Unlil
or crealure reaches lhe lop of lhe area wilhoul slriking lhe spell ends, any crealure who largels lhe warded
anylhing, il remains lhere, oscillaling slighlly, for crealure wilh an allack or a harmful spell musl firsl
lhe duralion. make a Wisdom saving lhrow. On a failed save, the
creature musl choose a new largel or lose lhe allack
AI lhe end of lhe duralion, affecled objecls and
crealures fali back down.

272 PART 3 I SPELLS


or spell. This spell doesn't protect the warded creature
from area effects, such as the explosion of a fireball.

If the warded creature makes an attack or casts a spell
that affects an enemy creature, this spell ends.

SCORCHING RAY
2nd./evel evocation

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V. S
Duration: Instantaneous

Vou create three rays of fire and hurJ them at targets
within range. Vou can hurJ them at one target or several.

Make a ranged spell attack for each ray. On a hit, the
target takes 2d6 fire damage.

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher. you create one additional
ray for each slot leveI above 2nd.

SCRYING
5th-leveI divination

Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Self
Components: V. S. M (a focus worth at least 1.000 gp.

such as a crystal ball, a silver mirror, or a font filled
with holy water)

Duration: Concentration. up to la minutes

Vou can see and hear a particular creature you choose
that is on the same plane of existence as you. The target
must make a Wisdom saving throw, which is modified
by how well you know the target and the sort of physical
connection you have to it. Jf a target knows you're
casting this spell, it can fail the saving throw voluntarily
if it wants to be observed.

Knowledge Save Modifier
Secondhand (you have heard of the target)
Firsthand (you have met the target) +s
Familiar (you know the target well)
+0
Connection
Likeness or picture -s
Possession ar garment
Body parto lock of hair. bit of nail, or the like Save Modifier
-2
-4
-10

On a successful save. the target isn't affected. and you
can't use this spell against it again for 24 hours.

On a failed save. the spell creates an invisible sensor
within 10 feet of the target. Vou can see and hear through
the sensor as if you were there. The sensor moves with
lhe target, remaining within 10 feet of it for the duration.
A creature that can see invisible objects sees the sensor
as a luminous orb about the size of your fist.

Instead of targeting a creature. you can choose a
location you have seen before as the target of this spell.
When you do, the sensor appcars al that location and
doesn't move.


SEARING SMITE someone who reaches out to touch you would bump into
1st-leveI evocation you while it was seemingly still in midair.

Casting Time: I bonus action A creature can use its action to inspect a target and
Range: Self make an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
Components: V spell save DC. If it succeeds, it becomes aware that the
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute target is disguised.

The next time you hit a creature with a melee weapon SENDING
attack during the spell's duration, your weapon flares 3rd./eveI evocation
with white.hot intensity, and the attack deals an extra
Id6 tire damage to the target and causes the target to Casting Time: I action
ignite in flames. At the start of each of its turns until Range: Unlimited
the spell ends, the target must make a Constitution Components: V, S, M (a short piece of tine copper wire)
saving throw. On a failed save, it takes Id6 tire damage. Duration: I round
On a successful save, the spell ends. lf the target or a
creature within 5 feet of it uses an action to put out the Vou send a short message of twenty-tive words or
flames, or if some other effect douses the flames (such less to a creature with which you are familiar. The
as the target being submerged in water), the spell ends. creature hears the message in its mind, recognizes
you as the sender if it knows you, and can answer in a
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a like manner immediately. The spell enables creatures
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, the initial extra damage with Intelligence scores of at least I to understand the
dealt by the attack increases by Id6 for each slot meaning of your message.
leveI above 1st.
Vou can send the message across any distance and
SEE INVISIBILITY even to other planes of existence, but if the target is on a
2nd./eveI divination different plane than you, there is a 5 percent chance that
the message doesn't arrive.
Casting Time: I action
Range: SeI f SEQUESTER
Components: V,S, M (a pinch of tale and a small 7th-leveI transmutation

sprinkling of powdered silver) Casting Time: I action
Duration: I hour Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a powder composed of diamond,
For the duration, you see invisible creatures and objects
as if they were visible, and you can see into the Ethereal emerald, ruby, and sapphire dust worth at least 5,000
Plane. Ethereal creatures and objects appear ghostly gp, which the spell consumes)
and translucent. Duration: Until dispelled

SEEMING By means of this spell, a willing creature or an object
5th./evel iJJusion can be hidden away, safe from detection for the
duration. When you cast the spell and touch the target,
Casting Time: I action it becomes invisible and can't be targeted by divination
Range: 30 feet spells or perceived through scrying sensors created by
Components: V,S divination spells.
Duration: 8 hours
If the target is a creature, it falls into a state of
This spell allows you to change the appearance of any suspended animation. Time ceases to flow for it, and it
number of creatures that you can see within range. Vou doesn't grow older.
give each target you choose a new, iIIusory appearance.
An unwilling target can make a Charisma saving throw, Vou can set a condition for the spell to end early.
and if it succeeds, it is unaffected by this spell. The condition can be anything you choose, but it
must occur or be visible within I mile of the target.
The spell disguises physical appearance as well as Examples include "after 1,000 years" or "when the
clothing, armor, weapons, and equipment. Vou can make tarrasque awakens." This spell also ends if the target
each creature se em I foot shorter or taller and appear takes any damage.
thin, fat, or in between. Vou can't change a target's body
type, so you must choose a form that has the same SHAPECHANGE
basic arrangement of limbs. Otherwise, the extent of 9th-leveI transmutation
the illusion is up to you. The spell lasts for the duration,
unless you use your action to dismiss it sooner. Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
The changes wrought by this spell fail to hold up to Components: V,S, M (a jade circlet worth at least 1,500
physical inspection. For example, if you use this spell
to add a hat to a creature's outtit, objects pass through gp, which you must place on your head before you
the hat, and anyone who touches it would feel nothing cast the spell)
or would feel the creature's head and hair. If you use Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
this spell to appear thinner than you are, the hand of
Vou assume the form of a different creature for the
duration. The new form can be of any creature with
a challenge rating equal to your leveI or lower. The

PART 3 I SPELLS


creature can't be a construct or an undead, and you SHIELD
must have seen the sort of creature at least once. Vou 1st-levei abjuration
transform into an average example of that creature, one
without any c1ass leveis or the Spellcasting trait. Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take when you are
hit by an attack or targeted by the magic missile spell
Vour game statistics are replaced by the statistics
of the chosen creature, though you retain your Range: SeI f
alignment and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma Components: V, S
scores. Vou also retain ali of your skill and saving Duration: 1 round
throw proficiencies, in addition to gaining those of the
creature. If the creature has the same proficiency as you An invisible barrier of magical force appears and
and the bonus Iisted in its statistics is higher than yours, protects YOU. Until the start ofyour next turn, you have a
use the creature's bonus in place of yours. Vou can't use +5 bonus to AC, including against the triggering attack,
any legendary actions or lair actions of the new formo and you take no damage from magic missile.

Vou assume the hit points and Hit Dice ofthe new SHIELD OF FAITH
formo When you revert to your normal form, you 1st-levei abjuration
return to the number of hit points you had before you
transformed. ]f you revert as a result of dropping to Casting Time: 1 bonus action
O hit points, any excess damage carries over to your Range: 60 feet
normal formo As long as the excess damage doesn't Components: V, S, M (a small parchment with a bit of
reduce your normal form to O hit points, you aren't
knocked unconscious. holy text writlen on it)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou retain the benefit of any features from your c1ass,
race, or other source and can use them, provided that A shimmering field appears and surrounds a creature
your new form is physically capable of doing so. Vou ofyour choice within range, granting it a +2 bonus to AC
can't use any special senses you have (for example, for the duration.
darkvision) unless your new form also has that sense.
Vou can only speak if the creature can normally speak. SHILLELAGH
Transmutation cantrip
When you transform, you choose whether your
equipment falls to the ground, merges into the new Casting Time: 1 bonus action
form, or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as Range: Touch
normal. The DM determines whether it is practical for Components: V, S, M (mistletoe, a shamrock leaf, and a
the new form to wear a piece of equipment, based on
the creature's shape and size. Vour equipment doesn't c1ub or quarterstaff)
change shape or size to match the new form, and any Duration: 1 minute
equipment that the new form can't wear must either fali
to the ground or merge into your new formo Equipment The wood of a c1ub or quarterstaff you are holding is
that merges has no effect in that state. imbued with nature's power. For the duration, you can
use your spellcasting ability instead of Strength for
During this spell's duration, you can use your action to the atlack and damage rolls of melee attacks using
assume a different form following the same restrictions that weapon, and the weapon's damage die becomes
and rules for the original form, with one exception; if a d8. The weapon also becomes magical, if it isn't
your new form has more hit points than your current already. The spell ends if you cast it again or if you let go
one, your hit points remain at their current value. of the weapon.

SHATTER SHOCKING GRASP
2nd.level evocation Evocat/on cantrip

Casting Time: 1 action Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a chip of mica) Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous Duration: Instantaneous

A sudden loud ringing noise, painfully intense, erupts Lightning springs from your hand to deliver a shock to
from a point of your choice within range. Each creature a creature you try to touch. Make a melee spell atlack
in a lO-foot-radius sphere centered on that point must against the target. Vou have advantage on the attack roll
make a Constitution saving throw. A creature takes if the target is wearing armor made of metal. On a hit,
3d8 thunder damage on a failed save, or half as much the target takes ld8lightning damage, and it can't take
damage on a successful one. A creature made of reactions until the start of its next turno
inorganic material such as stone, crystal, or metal has
disadvantage on this saving throw. The spell's damage incrcases hy ld8 when you reach
5th levei (2d8), 11th levei (3d8), and 17th levei (4d8).
A nonmagical object that isn't being worn or carried
also takes the damage if it's in the spcll's arca. SILENCE
2nd-leveI iIlusion (ritl1al)
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by Casting Time: 1 action up to 10 minutes
ld8 for each slot levei above 2nd. Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration,

PART 3 SPEI LS


For the duration, no sound can be created within or If the simulacrum is damaged, you can repair it in an
pass through a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on a alchemicallaboratory, using rare herbs and minerais
point you choose within range. Any creature or object worth 100 gp per hit poim it regains. The simulacrum
entirely inside the sphere is immune to thunder damage, lasts until it drops to O hit points, at which point it
and creatures are deafened while entirely inside it. reverts to snow and melts instantly.
Casting a spell that includes a verbal component is
impossible there. If you cast this spell again, any currently
active duplicates you created with this spell are
SILENT IMAGE instantly destrayed.
1st-/evel iJlusion
SLEEP
Casting Time: 1 action 1st-levei enchantment
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (a bit of fleece) Casting Time: 1 action
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of fine sand, rose petals,
Vou create the image of an object, a creature, or some
other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a 15-foot or a cricket)
cube. The image appears at a spot within range and Duration: 1 minute
lasts for the duration. The image is purely visual; it isn't
accompanied by sound, smell, or other sensory effects. This spell sends creatures into a magical slumber.
RolI 5d8; the total is how many hit points of creatures
Vou can use your action to cause the image to move to this spell can affect. Creatures within 20 feet of
any spot within range. As the image changes location, a point you choose within range are affected in
you can alter its appearance so that its movements ascending order of their currem hit points (ignoring
appear natural for the image. For example, if you create unconscious creatures).
an image of a creature and move it, you can alter the
image so that it appears to be walking. Starting with the creature that has the lowest current
hit points, each creature affected by this spell falls
Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an unconscious until the spell ends, the sleeper takes
illusion, because things can pass through it. A creature damage, or someone uses an action to shake or slap the
that uses its action to examine the image can determine sleeper awake. Subtract each creature's hit points fram
that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence the total before moving on to the creature with the next
(Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If a lowest hit points. A creature's hit points must be equal
creature disceros the illusion for what it is, the creature to or less than the remaining total for that creature
can see through the image. to be affected.

SIMULACRUM Undead and creatures immune to being charmed
7th-levei illusion aren't affected by this spell.

Casting Time: 12 hours At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
Range: Touch spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, roll an additional 2d8 for
Components: V, S, M (snow or ice in quantities each slot levei above 1st.

sufficient to made a life-size copy of the duplicated SLEET STORM
creature; some hair, fingeroail clippings, or other 3rd-/evel conjuration
piece of that creature's body placed inside the snow
or ice; and powdered ruby worth 1,500 gp, sprinkled Casting Time: 1 action
over the duplicate and consumed by the spell) Range: 150 feet
Duration: Until dispelled Components: V, S, M (a pinch of dust and a few

Vou shape an illusory duplica te of one beast or drops of water)
humanoid that is within range for the entire casting Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
time of the spell. The duplicate is a creature, partially
real and formed from ice or snow, and it can take Until the spell ends, freezing rain and sleet fali in a
actions and otherwise be affected as a normal creature. 20-foot-tall cylinder with a 40-foot radius centered on
It appears to be the same as the original, but it has half a point you choose within range. The area is heavily
the creature's hit point maximum and is formed without obscured, and exposed flames in the area are doused.
any equipment. Otherwise, the illusion uses ali the
statistics of the creature it duplicates. The ground in the area is covered with slick ice,
making it difficult terrain. When a creature enters the
The simulacrum is friendly to you and creatures you spell's area for the first time on aturo or starts its turo
designa te. It obeys your spoken commands, moving there, it must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed
and acting in accordance with your wishes and acting save, it falls prone.
on your turo in combat. The simulacrum lacks the
ability to learo or beco me more powerful, so it never If a creature is concentrating in the spell's area, the
increases its levei or other abilities, nor can it regain creature must make a successful Constitution saving
expended spell slots. throw against your spell save DC or lose concentration.

PART 3 I SPELLS


SLOW mouth and can't be undead. The spell fails if the corpse
3rd-Ievel transmutation was the target of this spell within the last 10 days.

Casting Time: 1 action Until the spell ends, you can ask the corpse up to five
Range: 120 feet questions. The corpse knows only what it knew in life,
Components: V, S, M (a drop of molasses) inc1uding the languages it knew. Answers are usually
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute brief, cryptic, ar repetitive, and the corpse is under no
compulsion to offer a truthful answer if you are hostile
Vou alter time around up to six creatures ofyour to it or it recognizes you as an enemy. This spell doesn't
choice in a 40-foot cube within range, Each target must return the creature's soul to its body, only its animating
succeed on a Wisdom saving throw ar be affected by spiril. Thus, the corpse can't learn new Information,
this spell for the duration. doesn't comprehend anything that has happened since it
died, and can't speculate about future events.
An affected target's speed is halved, it takes a -2
penalty to AC and Dexterity saving throws, and it can't SPEAK WITH PLANTS
use reactions. On its turn, it can use elther an action ar 3rd-Ievel transmutation
a bonus action, not both. Regardless of the creature's
abilities ar magic items, it can't make more than one Casting Time: I action
melee ar ranged attack during its turno Range: Sei f (30-foot radius)
Components: V, S
If the creature attempts to cast a spell with a casting Duration: 10 minutes
time of 1 action, roll a d20. On an 11 ar higher, the spell
doesn't take effect until the creature's next turn, and the Vou imbue plants within 30 feet of you with limited
creature must use its action on that turn to complete the sentience and animation, giving them the ability
spell. If it can't, the spell is wasted. to communicate with you and follow your simple
commands. Vou can question plants about events in the
A creature affected by this spell makes another spell's area within the past day, gaining information
Wisdom savlng throw at the end of its turno On a about crealures that have passed, weather, and other
successful save, the effect ends for lI. circumstances.

SPARE THE DYING Vou can also turn difficult terrain caused by plant
Necromancy cantrip growth (such as thickets and undergrowth) into ordinary
terrain that lasls for the duratlon. Or you can turn
Casting Time: I action ordinary terrain where plants are present into difficult
Range: Touch terrain that lasts for the duration, causing vines and
Components: V, S branches to hindcr pursuers, for example.
Duration: Instantaneous
Plants might be able to perform other tasks on your
Vou touch a living creature that has O hit points. The behalf, at the DM's discretion. The spell doesn't enable
creature becomes stable. This spell has no effect on plants to uproot themselves and move about, but they
undead ar constructs. can freely move branches, tendrils, and stalks.

SPEAK WITH ANIMALS lf a plant creature is in the area, you can communicate
1st-leveI divination (ritual) with it as if you shared a common language, but you
gain no magical ability to influence it.
Casting Time: I action
Range: Sei f This spell can cause the plants created by the entangle
Components: V, S spell to release a restrained creature.
Duration: 10 minutes
SPIDER CUMB
Vou gain the ability to comprehend and verbally 2nd-leveI transmutation
communicate with beasts for the duration. The
knowledge and awareness of many beasts is limited Casting Time: I action
by their intelligence, but at minimum, beasts can Range: Touch
give you information about nearby locations and Components: V, S, M (a drop of bitumen and a spider)
monsters, inc1uding whatever they can perceive ar have Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
perceived within the past day. Vou mlght be able to
persuade a beast to perform a small favor for you, at the Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch
DM's discretion. gains the ability to move up, down, and across vertical
surfaces and upside down along ceilings, while leaving
SPEAK WITH DEAD its hands free. The target also gains a c1imbing speed
3rd-Ievel necromancy equal to its walking speed.

Casting Time: I action SPIKE GROWTH
Range: 10 feet 2nd-leveI transmutation
Components: V, S, M (burning incense)
Duration: 10 minutes Casting Time: I action
Range: ISO feet
Vou grant the semblance of life and intelligence to a Components: V, S, M (seven sharp thorns ar seven
corpse of your choice within range, allowing It to answer
the questions you pose. The corpse must still have a small twigs, each sharpened to a point)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
277
PART 3 I SPELLS


The ground in a 20-foot radius centered on a point STAGGERING SMITE
within range twists and sprouts hard spikes and thorns.
The area becomes difficult terrain for the duration. 4th-levei evacatian
When a creature moves into or within the area, it takes
2d4 piercing damage for every 5 feet it travels. Casting Time: 1 banus actian
Range: Self
The transformation of the ground is camoufiaged to Components: V
look natura!. Any creature that can't see the area at the Duration: Canccntration, up to I minute
time the spell is cast must make a Wisdom (Perception)
check against your spell save DC to recognize the The next time you hit a creature with a melee weapon
terrain as hazardous before entering it. attack during this spell's duration, your weapon pierces
both body and mind, and the attack deals an extra
SPIRIT GUARDIANS 4d6 psychic damage to the target. The target must
make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, it has
3rd-/evel conjuration disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks, and
can't take reactions, until the end of its next turno
Casting Time: I action
Range: SeI f (15-foot radius) STINKING CLOUD
Components: V, S, M (a holy symbol)
Duration: Concentration, up to lO minutes 3rd-/evel conjuratiaIl

Vou call forth spirits to protect you. They fiit around you Casting Time: I action
to a distance of 15 feet for the duration. If you are good Range: 90 feet
or neutra!. their spectral form appears angelic or fey Components: V, S, M (a rotten egg or several skunk
(your choice). If you are evil, they appear fiendish.
cabbage leaves)
When you cast this spell, you can designate any Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
number of creatures you can see to be unaffected by it.
An affected creature's speed is halved in the area, and Vou create a 20-foot-radius sphere of yellow, nauseating
when the creature enters the area for the first time on gas centered on a point within range. The c10ud spreads
a turn or starts its turn there, it must make a Wisdom around corners, and its area is hcavily obscured. The
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d8 cloud lingers in the air for the duratioll.
radiant damage (if you are good or neutral) or 3d8
necrotic damage (if you are evil). On a successful save, Each creature that is completely within the c1aud at
the creature takes half as much damage. the start af its turn must make a Canstitutian saving
throw against paisano On a failed save, the creature
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a spends its actian that turn retching and reeling.
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, the damage increases by Creatures that dan't need to breathe ar are immune to
Id8 for each slot leveI above 3rd. paison automatically succeed on this saving throw.

SPIRITUAL WEAPON A maderate wind (at least 10 miles per hour) disperses
the c10ud after 4 rounds. A strong wind (at Jeast 20
2nd-levei evacatian miles per haur) disperses it after I round.

Casting Time: I bonus actian STONE SHAPE
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S 4th-levei transmutation
Duration: I minute
Casting Time: I action
You create a fioating, spectral weapon within range that Range: Touch
lasts for the duration or until you cast this spell again. Components: V, S, M (50ft c1ay,which must be worked
When you cast the spell, you can make a melee spell
attack against a creature within 5 feet of the weapon. On into roughly the desired shape of the stone object)
a hit, the target takes force damage equal to Id8 + your Duration: Instantaneous
spellcasting ability modifier.
Vou touch a stone object of Medium size or smaller or
As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the a section of stone no more than 5 feet in any dimension
weapon up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a and form it into any shape that suits your purpose. So,
creature within 5 feet of it. for example, you could shape a large rock into a weapon,
idol, or coffer, or make a small passage through a wall,
The weapon can take whatever form yau choose. as long as the wall is less than 5 feet thick. Vou could
Clerics of deities who are associated with a particular also shape a stone door or its frame to seal the door
weapon (as SI. Cuthbert is known for his mace shut. The object you create can have up to two hinges
and Thor for his hammer) make this spell's effect and a latch, but finer mechallical detail isn't possible.
resemble that weapon.
STONESKIN
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher, the damage increases by 4th-levei abjuration
Id8 for every twa slot leveIs above the 2nd.
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (diamond dust worth 100 gp,

which the spell consumes)
Duration: COllcentration, up to I hour

PART 3 I SI'ELLS


This spell turns the flesh of a willing creature you touch The target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
as hard as stone. Until the spell ends, the target has failed save, it pursues the course of action you described
resistance to nonmagical bludgeoning, piercing, and to the best of its ability. The suggested course of action
slashing damage.
can continue for the entire duration. Ir the suggested
STORM OF VENGEANCE
activity can be completed in a shorter time, the spell
9th-levei conjuration ends when the subject tinishes what it was asked to do.

Casting Time: 1 action up to 1 minute Vou can also specify conditions lhat will trigger a
Range: Sight special activity during the duration. For example, you
Components: V, S might suggest that a knight give her warhorse to the
Duration: Concentration,
tirst beggar she meets. Ir the condition isn't met before
A churning storm cloud forms, centered on a point you
can see and spreading to a radius of 360 fee!. Lightning the spell expires, the activity isn't performed.
flashes in the area, thunder booms, and strong winds
roar. Each creature under the cloud (no more than 5,000 Ir you or any of your companions damage the target,
feet beneath the cloud) when it appears must make a
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature the spell ends.
takes 2d6 thunder damage and becomes deafened
for 5 minutes. SUNBEAM

Each round you maintain concentration on this spell, 6th-levei evocation
the storm produces additional effects on your turno
Casting Time: 1 action
Round 2. Acidic rain falls from the cloud. Range: Self (60-foot line)
Each creature and object under the cloud takes Components: V, S, M (a magnifying glass)
ld6 acid damage. Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

Round 3. Vou call six bolts of lightning from the A beam of brilliant light flashes out from your hand
cloud to strike six creatures or objects of your choice in a 5-foot-wide, 60-foot-long line. Each creature in
beneath the cloud. A given creature or object can't be the line must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
struck by more than one boi!. A struck creature must failed save, a creature takes 6d8 radiant damage and
make a Dexterity saving throw. The creature takes is blinded until your next turno On a successful save,
lOd6lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much it takes half as much damage and isn't blinded by this
damage on a successful one. spell. Undead and oozes have disadvantage on this
saving throw.
Round 4. Hailstones rain down from the
cloud. Each creature under the cloud takes 2d6 Vou can create a new line of radiance as your action
bludgeoning damage. on any turn until the spell ends.

Round 5-10. Gusts and freezing rain assail the For the duration, a mote of brilliant radiance shines in
area under the cloud. The area becomes difficult your hand. It sheds bright light in a 30-foot radius and
terrain and is heavily obscured. Each creature there dim light for an additional 30 fee!. This lighl is sunligh!.
takes ld6 cold damage. Ranged weapon attacks in
the area are impossible. The wind and rain count as SUNBURST
a severe distraction for the purposes of maintaining
concentration on spells. Finally, gusts of strong wind 8th-leveI evocation
(ranging from 20 to 50 miles per hour) automatically
disperse fog, mists, and similar phenomena in the area, Casting Time: 1 action
whether mundane or magical. Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S, M (tire and a piece of sunstone)
SUGGESTlON Duration: Instantaneous

2nd-levei enchantment Brilliant sunlight flashes in a 60-foot radius centered
on a point you choose within range. Each creature in
Casting Time: 1 action that light must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
Range: 30 feet failed save, a creature takes 12d6 radiant damage and is
Components: V, M (a snake's tongue and either a bit of blinded for 1 minute. On a successful save, it takes half
as much damage and isn't blinded by this spell. Undead
honeycomb or a drop of sweet oil) and oozes have disadvantage on this saving throw.
Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours
A creature blinded by this spell makes another
Vou suggest a course of activity (limited to a sentence Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turns.
or two) and magically influence a creature you can On a successful save, it is no longer blinded.
see within range that can hear and understand YOU.
Creatures that can't be charmed are immune to this This spell dispels any darkness in its area that was
effec!. The suggestion must be worded in such a manner created by a spell.
as to make the course of action sound reasonable.
Asking the creature to stab itself, throw itself onto SWIFT QurVER
a spear, immolate itself, or do some other obviously
harmful act ends the spell. 5th-leveI transmutation

Casting Time: 1 bonus action 279
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a quiver containing at least one

piece of ammunition)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

PART 3 I SPELLS


Vou transmute your quiver so it produces an endless it is incapable of meaningful communication and has
supply of nonmagical ammunition, which seems to leap disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks.
into your hand when you reach for it.
Fear. Each target must make a Wisdom saving throw
On each of your turns until the spell ends, you can use and becomes frightened for 1 minute on a failed save.
a bonus action to make two attacks with a weapon that While frightened, the target drops whatever it is holding
uses ammunition from the quiver. Each time you make and must move at least 30 feet away from the glyph on
such a ranged attack, your quiver magically replaces each of its turns, if able.
the piece of ammunition you used with a similar piece
of nonmagical ammunition. Any pieces of ammunition Hope/essness. Each target must make a Charisma
created by this spell disintegrate when the spell ends. ]f saving throw. On a failed save, the target is
the quiver leaves your possession, the spell ends. overwhelmed with despair for 1 minute. During this
time, it can't attack or target any creature with harmful
SYMBOL abilities, spells, or other magical effects.

7th-levei abjuration Insanity. Each target must make an lntelligence saving
throw. On a failed save, the target is driven insane for
Casting Time: 1 minute 1 minute. An insane creature can't take actions, can't
Range: Touch understand what other creatures say, can't read, and
Components: V, S, M (mercury, phosphorus, and speaks only in gibberish. The DM contrais its movement,
which is erratic.
powdered diamond and opa I with a total value of at
least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes) Pain. Each target must make a Constitution saving
Duration: Until dispelled or triggered throw and becomes incapacitated with excruciating pain
for 1 minute on a failed save.
When you cast this spell, you inscribe a harmful glyph
either on a surface (such as a section of floor, a wall, or S/eep. Each target must make a Wisdom saving throw
a table) or within an object that can be c10sed to conceal and falls unconscious for 10 minutes on a failed save. A
the glyph (such as a book, a scroll, or a treasure chest). creature awakens if it takes damage or if someone uses
]f you choose a surface, the glyph can cover an area of an action to shake or slap it awake.
the surface no larger than 10 feet in diameter. If you
choose an object, that object must remain in its place; if Stunning. Each target must make a Wisdom saving
the object is moved more than 10 feet from where you throw and becomes stunned for 1 minute on a failed save.
cast this spell, the glyph is broken, and the spell ends
without being triggered. TASHA'S HIDEOUS LAUGHTER
1st-levei enchantment
The glyph is nearly invisible, requiring an Intelligence
(lnvestigation) check against your spell save Casting Time: 1 action
DC to find it. Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (tiny tarts and a feather that is
Vou decide what triggers the glyph when you cast the
spell. For glyphs inscribed on a surface, the most typical waved in the air)
triggers include touching or stepping on the glyph, Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
removing another object covering it, approaching within
a certain distance of it, or manipulating the object A creature of your choice that you can see within range
that holds it. For glyphs inscribed within an object, perceives everything as hilariously funny and falls
the most common triggers are opening the object, into fits of laughter if this spell affects it. The target
approaching within a certain distance of it, or seeing or must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or fali prone,
reading the glyph. becoming incapacitated and unable to stand up for the
duration. A creature with an lntelligence score of 4 or
Vou can further refine the trigger so the spell is less isn't affected.
activated only under certain circumstances or according
to a creature's physical characteristics (such as height At the end of each of its turns, and each time it takes
or weight), or physical kind (for example, the ward could damage, the target can make another Wisdom saving
be set to affect hags or shapechangers). Vou can also throw. The target has advantage on the saving throw if
specify creatures that don't trigger the glyph, such as it's triggered by damage. On a success, the spell ends.
those who say a certain password.
TELEKINESIS
When you inscribe the glyph, choose one of the 5th.level trallsmutation
options below for its effect. Once triggered, the glyph
glows, filling a 60-foot-radius sphere with dim Iight Casting Time: 1 action up to 10 minutes
for 10 minutes, after which time the spell ends. Each Range: 60 feet
creature in the sphere when the glyph activates is Components: V, S
targcted by its effect, as is a creature that enters the Duration: Concentration,
sphere for the first time on a turn or ends its turn there.
Vou gain the ability to move or manipulate creatures
Death. Each target must make a Constitution saving or objects by thought. When you cast the spell, and as
throw, taking IOdlO necrotic damage on a failed save, or your action each round for the duration, you can exert
half as much damage on a successful save. your will on one creature or object that you can see
within range, causing the appropriate effect below. Vou
Discord. Each target must make a Constitution saving can affect the same target round after round, or choose
throw. On a failed save, a target bickers and argues a new one at any time. ]f you switch targets, the prior
with other creatures for 1 minute. During this time, target is no longer affected by the spell.

280 PART 3 I SPELLS


Creature. Vou can lry to move a Huge or smaller you. Vour familiarily with the destinalion determines
crealure. Make an abilily check wilh your spellcasting whelher you arrive lhere successfully. The DM rolls
ability contested by the crealure's Strength check. ]f dlOO and consults the table.
you win lhe contesl, you move the creature up to 30 feet
in any direclion, including upward but not beyond the Familiarily Mishap Similar Off On
range of lhis spel!. Until the end of your nexllurn, the Permanent circle Area Targel Targel
creature is restrained in your telekinetic gripo A creature Associaled objecl 01-05 01-100
Iifled upward is suspended in mid.air. Very familiar 01-33 06-13 14-24 01-100
Seen casually 01-43 34-43 44-53 25-100
On subsequenl rounds, you can use your action lO Viewed once 01-43 44-53 54-73 54-100
atlempl to maintain your telekinetic grip on the creature Descriplion 01-50 44-53 54-73 74-100
by repealing lhe contest. False destinalion 51-100 74-100

Object. Vou can try to move an objecl thal weighs Familiarity. "Permanent circle" means a permanent
up to 1,000 pounds.lfthe object isn't being worn or teleportation circle whose sigil sequence you know.
carried, you automalically move il up lo 30 feet in any "Associaled object" means that you possess an objecl
direction, but not beyond lhe range of lhis spell. taken from the desired destination within the last six
months, such as a book from a wizard's Iibrary, bed
If the object is worn or carried by a creature, you must linen from a royal suite, or a chunk of marble from a
make an ability check wilh your spellcasting ability lich's secret tombo
contesled by lhat creature's Strenglh check. ]f you
succeed, you pull the object away from that creature and "Very familiar" is a place you have been very often, a
can move il up to 30 feel in any direclion but nol beyond place you have carefully studied, or a place you can see
the range of this spel!. when you cast the spell. "Seen casually" is someplace
you have seen more than once bul wilh which you aren't
Vou can exert fine conlrol on objecls with your very familiar. "Viewed once" is a place you have seen
telekinetic grip, such as manipulaling a simple tool, once, possibly using magic. "Description" is a place
opening a door or a conlainer, stowing or relrieving whose Iocation and appearance you know through
an item from an open container, or pouring the someone else's description, perhaps from a map.
contents from a via!'
"False destination" is a place that doesn't exist.
TELEPATHY Perhaps you tried to scry an enemy's sanctum but
instead viewed an illusion, or you are atlempting lo
8th./evel evocation teleport to a familiar localion that no longer exists.

Casting Time: I aclion 00 Target. Vou and your group (or the target objecl)
Range: Unlimited appear where you wanllo.
Components: V, S, M (a pair of Iinked silver rings)
Duration: 24 hours OffTarget. Vou and your group (or the larget object)
appear a random dislance away from the deslination
Vou create a telepathic link between yourself and in a random direclion. Distance off target is Id 10 x
a willing crealure with which you are familiar. The Id lO percent of the distance that was to be traveled.
creature can be anywhere on the same plane of For example, if you tried to traveI 120 miles, landed off
exislence as you. The spell ends if you or the largel are largel, and rolled a 5 and 3 on the two dlOs, lhen you
no longer on the same plane. would be off largel by 15 percent, or 18 miles. The DM
determines lhe direction off targel randomly by rolling a
Until the spell ends, you and the target can d8 and designaling I as north, 2 as northeast, 3 as easl,
inslantaneously share words, images, sounds, and and so on around lhe points of lhe compasso ]f you were
other sensory messages with one another through the teleporting lo a coastal city and wound up 18 miles out
Iink, and lhe target recognizes you as the creature it at sea, you could be in trouble.
is communicating with. The spell enables a creature
wilh an Intelligence score of at least I to understand Similar Area. Vou and your group (or the targel
lhe meaning of your words and lake in lhe scope of any object) wind up in a different area that's visually or
sensory messages you send lo 11. themalically similar to the target area. ]f you are
heading for your home laboratory, for example, you
TELEPORT might wind up in another wizard's laboratory or in
an alchemical supply shop that has many of the same
7th./evel conjuration tools and implemenls as your laboratory. Generally,
you appear in the closest similar place, bul since the
Casting Time: I action spell has no range Iimit, you could conceivably wind up
Range: 10 feel anywhere on the plane.
Components: V
Duration: Inslantaneous Mishap. The spell's unpredictable magic results in a
difficultjourney. Each leleporting crealure (or the largel
This spell instantly transports you and up to eight objecl) lakes 3d 10 force damage, and lhe DM rerolls on
willing creatures of your choice that you can see within
range, or a single object that you can see within range,
to a destination you select. Ifyou target an object, il
must be able to fit enlirely inside a lO.fool cube, and il
can't be held or carried by an unwilling crealure.

The destination you choose must be known to you,
and il musl be on the same plane of exislence as

PART 3 PELLS 281


the table to see where you wind up (multiple mishaps THAUMATURGY
can occur, dealing damage each time). Transmutation cantrip

TELEPORTATION CIRCLE Casting Time: 1 action
5th-leveI conjuration Range: 30 feet
Components: V
Casting Time: 1 minute Duration: Up to 1 minute
Range: 10 feet
Components: V, M (rare chalks and inks infused with Vou manifest a minor wonder, a sign of supernatural
power, within range. Vou create one of the following
precious gems with 50 gp, which the spell consumes) magical effects within range:
Duration: 1 round
Vour voice booms up to three times as loud as normal
As you cast the spell, you draw a lO-foot-diameter for 1 minute.
circle on the ground inscribed with sigils that Iink Vou cause liames to lIicker, brighten, dim, or change
your location to a permanent teleportation circle of color for 1 minute.
your choice whose sigil sequence you know and that is Vou cause harmless tremors in the ground for 1
on the same plane of existence as you. A shimmering minute.
portal opens within the circle you drew and remains Vou create an instantaneous sound that originates
open until the end of your next turn. Any creature that from a point of your choice within range, such as a
enters the portal instantly appears within 5 feet of the rumble of thunder, the cry of a raven, or ominous
destination circle or in the nearest unoccupied space if whispers.
that space is occupied. Vou instantaneously cause an unlocked door or win-
dow to lIy open or slam shut.
Many major tempIes, guilds, and other important Vou alter the appearance of your eyes for 1 minute.
places have permanent teleportation circles inscribed
somewhere within their confines. Each such circle If you cast this spell multi pIe times, you can have up to
includes a unique sigil sequence-a string of magical three of its l-minute effects active at a time, and you can
runes arranged in a particular pattern. When you first dismiss such an effect as an action.
gain the ability to cast this spell, you learn the sigil
sequences for two destinations on the Material Plane, THORNWHIP
determined by the DM. Vou can learn additional sigil Transmutation cantrip
sequences during your adventures. Vou can commit
a new sigil sequence to memory after studying it Casting Time: 1 action
for 1 minute. Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (the stem of a plant with thorns)
Vou can create a permanent teleportation circle by Duration: 1nstantaneous
casting this spell in the same location every day for one
year. Vou need not use the circle to teleport when you Vou create a long, vine-Iike whip covered in thorns that
cast the spell in this way. lashes out at your command toward a creature in range.
Make a melee spell attack against the target. ]f the
TENSER'S FLOATING DISK attack hits, the creature takes 1d6 piercing damage, and
1st-leveI conjuration (ritual) if the creature is Large or smaller, you pull the creature
up to 10 feet c10ser to you.
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet This spell's damage increases by 1d6 when you reach
Components: V,S, M (a drop of mercury) 5th leveI (2d6), 11th levei (3d6), and 17th leveI (4d6).
Duration: 1 hour
THUNDEROUS SMITE
This spell creates a circular, horizontal plane of force, 1st-leveI evocation
3 feet in dia meter and 1 inch thick, that lIoats 3 feet
above the ground in an unoccupied space of your choice Casting Time: 1 bonus action
that you can see within range. The disk remains for the Range: Self
duration, and can hold up to 500 pounds. If more weight Components: V
is placed on it, the spell ends, and everything on the disk Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
falls to the ground.
The first time you hit with a melee weapon attack
The disk is immobile while you are within 20 feet of during this spell's duration, your weapon rings with
it. If you move more than 20 feet away from it, the disk thunder that is audible within 300 feet of you, and the
follows you so that it remains within 20 feet of YOU. It attack deals an extra 2d6 thunder damage to the target.
can move across uneven terrain, up or down stairs, Additionally, if the target is a creature, it must succeed
slopes and the Iike. but it can't cross an e1evation change on a Strength saving throw or be pushed 10 feet away
of 10 feet or more. For example, the disk can't move from you and knocked prone.
across a IO-foot-deep pit, nor could it leave such a pit if it
was created at the bottom. THUNDERWAVE
1st-leveI evocation
If you move more than 100 feet from the disk (typically
because it can't move around an obstacle to follow you), Casting Time: 1 action
the spell ends. Range: Self (15-foot cube)

PART 3 I SrELLS


Components: V, S TREE STRIDE
Duration: Instantaneous
5th-leveI conjuration
A wave of thunderous foree sweeps out from you. Eaeh
ereature in a 15-foot eube originating from you must Casting Time: 1 action up to 1 minute
make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a Range:Self
ereature takes 2d8 thunder damage and is pushed 10 Components: V, S
feet away from you. On a sueeessful save, the ereature Duration: Coneentration,
takes half as mueh damage and isn't pushed.
Vou gain the ability to enter a tree and move from inside
In addition, unseeured objeets that are eompletely it to inside another tree of the same kind within 500
within the area of effeet are automatically pushed 10 feet feet. Both trees must be living and at least the same size
away from you by the spell's effeet, and the spell emits a as you. Vou must use 5 feet of movement to enter a tree.
thunderous boom audible out to 300 feet. Vou instantly know the location of ali other trees of the
same kind within 500 feet and, as part of the move used
At Higher LeveIs. When you east this spell using a to enter the tree, ean either pass into one of those trees
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, the damage inereases by or step out of the tree you're in. Vou appear in a spot of
ld8 for eaeh slot leveI above 1st. your choice within 5 feet of the destination tree, using
another 5 feet of movement. If you have no movement
TIME STOP left, you appear within 5 feet of the tree you entered.

9th-levei transmutation Vou can use this transportation ability once per round
for the duration. Vou must end each turn outside a tree.
Casting Time: 1 aetion
Range: Self TRUE POLYMORPH
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous 9th-levei transmutation

Vou briefly stop the flow of time for everyone but Casting Time: 1 action
yourself. No time passes for other ereatures, while you Range: 30 feet
take Id4 + 1 turns in a row, during which you ean use Components: V, S, M (a drop of mereury, a dolIop of
aetions and move as normal.
gum arabic, and a wisp of smoke)
This spell ends if one of the aetions you use during Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
this period, or any effeets that you ereate during this
period, affeets a ereature other than you or an objeet Choose one ereature or nonmagical objeet that you
being worn or earried by someone other than you. In can see within range. Vou transform the creature into
addition, the spell ends if you move to a plaee more than a different creature, the ereature into an object, or the
1,000 feet from the loeation where you east it. objeet into a creature (the object must be neither worn
nor earried by another creature). The transformation
TONGUES lasts for the duration, or until the target drops to O hit
points or dies. If you concentrate on this spelI for the fulI
3rd-/evel divination duration, the transformation beeomes permanent.

Casting Time: I aetion Shapechangers aren't affected by this spell. An
Range: Toueh unwilIing creature ean make a Wisdom saving throw,
Components: V, M (a small day model of a ziggurat) and if it sueeeeds, it isn't affected by this spell.
Duration: 1 hour
Creature into Creature. If you turn a creature into
This spell grants the ereature you toueh the ability to another kind of creature, the new form can be any kind
understand any spoken language it hears. Moreover, you choose whose ehalIenge rating is equal to or less
when the target speaks, any ereature that knows at than the target's (or its leveI. if the target doesn't have a
least one language and ean hear the target understands chalIenge rating). The target's game statistics, induding
what it says. mental ability scores, are replaced by the statisties of
the new formo It retains its alignment and personality.
TRANSPORT VIA PLANTS
The target assumes the hit points of its new form,
6th-levei eonjuration and when it reverts to its normal form, the creature
returns to the number of hit points it had before it
Casting Time: 1 aetion transformed. If it reverts as a result of dropping to
Range: 10 feet O hit points, any excess damage carries over to its
Components: V, S normal formo As long as the excess damage doesn't
Duration: 1 round reduce the creature's normal form to O hit points, it isn't
knocked unconscious.
This spell ereates a magieallink between a Large or
larger inanimate plant within range and another plant, The creature is limited in the actions it can perform by
at any distanee, on the same plane of existence. Vou the nature of its new form, and it can't speak, east spelIs,
must have seen or touched the destination plant at least or take any other action that requires hands or speech,
onee before. For the duration, any creature can step into unless its new form is capable of such actions.
the target plant and exit from the destination plant by
using 5 feet of movement. The target's gear melds into the new formo The
creature can't activate, use, wield, or otherwise benelit
from any of its equipment.

PART 3 SPELLS


Object into Creature. Vou can turn an object into target's defenses. On your next turn, you gain advantage
any kind of creature, as long as the creature's size on your first attack roll against lhe target, provided that
is no larger than the object's size and the creature's this spe11hasn't ended.
cha11enge rating is 9 or lower. The creature is friendly to
you and your companions. It acts on each of your turns. TSUNAMI
Vou decide what action it takes and how it moves. The 8th-levei conjuration
DM has the creature's statislics and resolves ali of its
actions and movement. Casting Time: I minute up to 6 rounds
Range: Sight
[f the spe11becomes permanent, you no longer control Components: V, S
the creature. It might remain friendly to you, depending Duration: Concentralion,
on how you have treated it.
A wall of water springs into existence at a point you
Creature into Object. If you turn a creature into an choose within range, Vou can make the wall up to 300
object, it transforms along with whatever it is wearing feel long, 300 feet high, and 50 feet thick. The walllasts
and carrying into that formo The creature's statistics for the duration.
become those of the object, and the creature has no
rÍlemory of time spent in this form, after the spe11ends When lhe wall appears, each creature within its area
and it returns to its normal formo must make a Strength saving throw. On a failed save,
a creature takes 6dlO bludgeoning damage, or half as
TRUE RESURRECTION much damage on a successful save.
9th.level necromancy
At the start of each of your turns after the wall
Casting Time: 1 hour appears, the wa11,along with any creatures in it, moves
Range: Touch 50 feet away from YOU. Any Huge or smaller creature
Components: V, S, M (a sprinkle of holy water and inside the wall or whose space the wall enters when
it moves must succeed on a Strength saving throw or
diamonds worth at least 25,000 gp, which the take 5dlO bludgeoning damage. A creature can take
spe11consumes) this damage only once per round. At the end of the turn,
Duration: Instantaneous the wall's height is reduced by 50 feet, and the damage
creatures take from the spell on subsequent rounds is
Vou touch a creature that has been dead for no longer reduced by IdlO. When the wa11reaches O feet in height,
than 200 years and that died for any reason except the spe11ends.
old age. If the creature's sou I is free and wi11ing,the
creature is restored to life with a11its hit points. A creature caught in the wall can move by swimming.
Because of the force of the wave, though, the creature
This spe11doses a11wounds, neutralizes any poison, must make a successful Strength (Athletics) check
cures a11diseases, and lifts any curses affecting the against your spell save DC in order to move at alI. If it
crealure when it died. The spell replaces damaged or fails the check, it can't move, A creature that moves out
missing organs and limbs. of the area faIls to the ground.

The spe11can even provi de a new body if the original UNSEEN SERVANT
no longer exists, in which case you must speak the
creature's name, The creature then appears in an 1st-levei conjuration (ritual)
unoccupied space you choose within 10 feet of you.
Casting Time: 1 action
TRUE SEEING Range: 60 feet
6th.level divination Components: V, S, M (a piece of string and

Casting Time: 1 action a bit of wood)
Range: Touch Duration: 1 hour
Components: V, S, M (an ointment for the eyes that
This speIl creates an invisible, mindless, shapeless
costs 25 gp; is made from mushroom powder, saffron, force that performs simple tasks at your command until
and fat; and is consumed by the spe11) the speIl ends. The servant springs into existence in an
Duration: 1 hou r unoccupied space on the ground within range. It has AC
10, I hit point, and a Strength of 2, and it can't attack. [f
This spe11gives the willing creature you touch the ability it drops to Ohit points, the speIl ends.
to see things as they actually are. For the duration, the
creature has truesight, notices secret doors hidden by Once on each of your turns as a bonus action, you can
magic, and can see into the Ethereal Plane, ali out to a mentaIly command the servant to move up to 15 feet and
range of 120 feet. interact with an object. The servant can perform simple
tasks that a human servant could do, such as felching
TRUE STRIKE things, c1eaning, mending, folding c1othes, lighting
Divination cantrip fires, serving food, and pouring wine. Once you give the
command, the servant performs the task to the best of
Casting Time: 1 action up to 1 round its ability until it completes the task, then waits for your
Range: 30 feet next command.
Components: S
Duration: Concentration, If you command the servant to perform a task that
would move it more than 60 feet away from you,
Vou extend your hand and point a finger at a target in the spe11ends.
range. Vour magic grants you a brief insight into the

I'ART 3 I SI'ELLS


VAMPIRIC TOUCH WALL OF FORCE
3rd-Jevel necromancy 5th-leveI evocation

Casting Time: I action up to I minute Casting Time: I action
Range: Self Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S Components: V, S, M (a pinch of powder made by
Duration: Concentration,
crushing a clear gemstone)
The touch of your shadow-wreathed hand can siphon life Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
force from others to heal your wounds. Make a melee
spell attack against a creature wilhin your reach. On An invisible wall of force springs into existence at a
a hit, the target takes 3d6 necrotic damage, and you point you choose within range. The wall appears in
regain hit points equal to half the amount of necratic any orientation you choose, as a horizontal ar vertical
damage dealt. Until the spell ends, you can make the barrier ar at an angle. It can be free floating ar resting
attack again on each of your turns as an action. on a solid surface. Vou can form it into a hemispherical
dome ar a sphere with a radius of up to 10 feet, ar you
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a can shape a flat surface made up of ten IO-foot-by-
spell slot of 4th levei ar higher, the damage increases by IO-foot panels. Each panel must be contiguous with
Id6 for each slot levei above 3rd. another pane!. In any form, the wall is 1/4 inch thick.
1t lasts for the duration. If the wall cuts through a
VICIOUS MOCKERY creature's space when it appears, the creature is pushed
Enchantmentcantrip to one side of the wall (your choice which side).

Casting Time: I action Nothing can physically pass through the wal!. It is
Range: 60 feet immune to ali damage and can't be dispelled by dispel
Components: V magic. A disintegrate spell destroys the wall instantly,
Duration: Instantaneous however. The wall also extends into the Ethereal Plane,
blocking ethereal travei through the wall.
Vou unleash a string of insults laced with subtle
enchantments at a creature you can see within range. lf WALL OF ICE
the target can hear you (though it need not understand 6th-leveI evocation
you), it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw ar take
Id4 psychic damage and have disadvantage on the next Casting Time: I action
attack rall it makes before the end of its next turo. Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a small piece of quartz)
This spell's damage increases by Id4 when you reach Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
5th levei (2d4), 11th levei (3d4), and 17th levei (4d4).
Vou create a wall of ice on a solid surface within range.
WALL OF FIRE Vou can form it into a hemispherical dome ar a sphere
4th-leveI evocation with a radius of up to 10 feet, ar you can shape a flat
surface made up of ten IO-foot-square panels. Each
Casting Time: I action panel must be contiguous with another pane!. In any
Range: 120 feet form, the wall is I foot thick and lasts for the duration.
Components: V, S, M (a small piece of phosphorus)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute If the wall cuts through a creature's space when it
appears, the creature within its area is pushed to one
Vou create a wall of fire on a solid surface within side of the wall and must make a Dexterity saving throw.
range. Vou can make the wall up to 60 feet long, 20 On a failed save, the creature takes IOd6 cold damage,
feet high, and I foot thick, ar a ringed wall up to 20 feet ar half as much damage on a successful save.
in diameter, 20 feet high, and I foot thick. The wall is
opaque and lasts for the duration. The wall is an object that can be damaged and thus
breached. 1t has AC 12 and 30 hit points per IO-foot
When the wall appears, each creature within its area section, and it is vulnerable to fire damage. Reducing
must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, a a 10-foot section ofwall to O hit points destrays it and
creature takes 5d8 fire damage, ar half as much damage leaves behind a sheet of frigid air in the space the wall
on a successful save. occupied. A creature moving thraugh the sheet of frigid
air for the first time on aturo must make a Constitution
One side of the wall, selected by you when you cast saving thraw. That creature takes 5d6 cold damage on a
this spell, deals 5d8 fire damage to each creature lhat failed save, ar half as much damage on a successful one.
ends its turo within 10 feet of that side ar inside the
wal!. A creature takes the same damage when it enters At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
the wall for the first time on a turo ar ends its turo there. spell slot of 7th levei ar higher, the damage the wall
The other side of the wall deals no damage. deals when it appears increases by 2d6, and the damage
fram passing through the sheet of frigid air increases by
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast lhis spell using a Id6, for each slot levei above 6th.
spell slot of 5th levei ar higher, the damage increases by
Id8 for each slot levei above 4th.

PAR'I 3 I SPELLS


WALL OF STONE make a Dexlerily saving throw. It takes 7d8 slashing
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
5th-leveI evocation successful one.

Casting Time: 1 aclion At Hil1her LeveIs. When you casllhis spe11using a
Range: 120 feel spe11slol of 71h levei or higher, boIh lypes of damage
Components: V,S, M (a small block of granile) increase by Id8 for each slollevel above 61h.
Duration: Concenlralion, up lO 10 minules
WARDING BOND
A nonmagical wall of solid slone springs inlo exislence
aI a poinl you choose wilhin range. The wa11is 6 inches 2nd-leveI abjuration
lhick and is composed of len lO-foOl-by-lO-foOpIanels.
Each panel musl be conliguous wilh alleasl one olher Casting Time: 1 action
pane!. AIlernatively. you can creale 10-foOl-by-20-fool Range: Touch
panels lhat are only 3 inches lhick. Components: V,S, M (a pair of plalinum rings worlh aI

If lhe wall culs lhrough a crealure's space when il leasl 50 gp each, which you and lhe largel musl wear
appears, lhe crealure is pushed lo one side of lhe wa11 for lhe duralion)
(your choice). lf a creature would be surrounded on a11 Duration: 1 hour
sides by lhe wa11(or lhe wa11and anolher solid surface),
lhal crealure can make a Dexlerity saving lhrow. On a This spell wards a willing crealure you louch and
success, il can use ils reaclion lo move up lo ils speed so creales a myslic conneclion belween you and lhe largel
lhat il is no longer enclosed by lhe wall. unlillhe spell ends. While lhe largel is wilhin 60 feel of
you. il gains a +1 bonus lo AC and saving lhrows, and
The wall can have any shape you desire, lhough il il has resislance lo ali damage. AIso, each lime il lakes
can'l occupy lhe same space as a crealure or objecl. damage, you lake lhe same amount of damage.
The wall doesn'l need lo be verlical or resl on any firm
foundalion. It musl. however, merge wilh and be solidly The spell ends if you drop lo Ohil poinls or if you
supporled by exisling slone. Thus, you can use lhis spell and lhe largel become separaled by more lhan 60 feel.
lo bridge a chasm or creale a ramp. It also ends if lhe spell is casl again on eilher of lhe
connecled crealures. Vou can also dismiss lhe spell
Ifyou creale a span grealer lhan 20 feel in lenglh, you as an aclion.
musl halve lhe size of each panello creale supporls.
Vou can crudely shape lhe walllo creale crenellalions, WATER BREATHING
balllemenls, and so on.
3rd-Ievel transmutation (ritual)
The wall is an objecl ma de of stone that can be
damaged and lhus breached. Each panel has AC 15 and Casting Time: 1 aclion
30 hit points per inch of thickness. Reducing a panel Range: 30 feel
lo O hit points destroys it and might cause connected Components: V,S, M (a shorl reed or piece of slraw)
panels to collapse aI the DM's discrelion. Duration: 24 hours

lf you maintain your concentralion on this spell for This spell granls up lo ten willing crealures you can see
its whole duralion, the wall becomes permanenl and wilhin range lhe abilily lo brealhe underwaler unlillhe
can't be dispelled. Olherwise, lhe wall disappears when spell ends. Affecled crealures also relain lheir normal
the spell ends. mode of respiralion.

WALL OF THORNS WATERWALK

6th-leveI conjuration 3rd-Ievel transmutation (ritual)

Casting Time: 1 action Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 120 feel Range: 30 feel
Components: V,S, M (a handful of lhorns) Components: V, S, M (a piece of cork)
Duration: Concenlralion, up to 10 minules Duration: 1 hour

Vou creale a wa11of lough, pliable. langled brush This spell granls lhe abilily lo move across any Iiquid
brislling with needle-sharp lhorns. The wa11appears surface-such as waler, acid, mud, snow, quicksand,
within range on a solid surface and lasls for lhe or lava-as if il were harmless solid ground (crealures
duralion. Vou choose lOmake lhe wall up lo 60 feel crossing mollen lava can slilllake damage from lhe
long, 10 feel high, and 5 feellhick or a circle lhal has heal). Up lo len willing crealures you can see wilhin
a 20-fool diameler and is up lo 20 feel high and 5 feel range gain lhis abilily for the duralion.
lhick. The wall blocks line of sighl.
lf you largel a crealure submerged in a Iiquid, the
When lhe wall appears, each crealure wilhin ils area spell carries lhe largello lhe surface of the liquid aI a
musl make a Dexlerily saving lhrow. On a failed save, rale of 60 feel per round.
a crealure lakes 7d8 piercing damage, or half as much
damage on a successful save. WEB

A crealure can move lhrough lhe wall, albeil slowly 2nd-leveI conjuration
and painfully. For every 1 fool a creature moves
lhrough lhe wa11,il musl spend 4 feel of movemenl. Casting Time: 1 aclion
Furlhermore, lhe firsllime a crealure enlers lhe wall Range: 60 feel
on a lurn or ends its lurn lhere, lhe crealure musl Components: V,S, M (a bil of spiderweb)
Duration: Concenlration, up to 1 hour

PART.3 Pil


Vou conjure a mass of thiek, stieky webbing at a point of Vou and up to ten willing ereatures you ean see
your ehoice within range, The webs fill a 20-foot eube within range assume a gaseous form for the duration,
from that point for the duration, The webs are diffieult appearing as wisps of c1oud. While in this c10ud form,
terrain and lightly obseure their area. a ereature has a flying speed of 300 feet and has
resistanee to damage from nonmagieal weapons. The
If the webs aren't anehored between two solid masses only aetions a ereature ean take in this form are the
(sueh as walls or trees) or layered aeross a floar, wall, Dash aetion or to revert to its normal formo Reverting
or eeiling, the eonjured web eollapses on itself, and the takes I minute, during whieh time a ereature is
spell ends at the start of your next turn. Webs layered ineapacitated and ean't move. Until the spell ends, a
over a flat surfaee have a depth of 5 feel. ereature ean revert to c10ud form, whieh also requires
the I-minute transformation.
Eaeh ereature that starts its turn in the webs or that
enters them during its turn must make a Dexterity If a ereature is in c10ud form and flying when the effeet
saving throw. On a failed save, the ereature is restrained ends, the ereature deseends 60 feet per round for 1
as long as it remains in the webs or until it breaks free. minute until it lands, which it does safely. If it ean't land
after 1 minute, the ereature falls the remaining distanee.
A ereature restrained by the webs ean use its aetion to
make a Strength eheek against your spell save De. If it WINDWALL
sueeeeds, it is no longer restrained.
3rd-/evel evocation
The webs are flammable. Any 5-foot eube of webs
exposed to fire burns away in 1 round, dealing 2d4 fire Casting Time: 1 action
damage to any ereature that starts its turn in the /ire. Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a tiny fan and a feather of
WEIRD
exotic origin)
9th-levei illusion Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

Casting Time: 1 aetion up to one minute A wall of strong wind rises from the ground at a point
Range: 120 feet you choose within range. Vou ean make the wall up
Components: V, S to 50 feet long, 15 feet high, and 1 foot thick. Vou ean
Duration: Coneentration, shape the wall in any way you ehoose so long as it
makes one continuous path along the ground. Thewall
Drawing on the deepest fears of a group of ereatures, lasts for the duration.
you ereate illusory ereatures in their minds, visible
only to them. Eaeh ereature in a 30-foot-radius When the wall appears, each creature within its area
sphere eentered on a point of your ehoice within must make a Strength saving throw. A ereature takes
range must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed 3d8 bludgeoning damage on a failed save, or half as
save, a ereature beeomes frightened for the duration. much damage on a successful one.
The illusion ealls on the ereature's deepest fears,
manifesting its worst nightmares as an implaeable The strong wind keeps fog, smoke, and other gases at
threal. At the start of eaeh of the frightened ereature's bay. Small or smaller flying ereatures or objects can't
turns, it must sueeeed on a Wisdom saving throw or pass through the wall. Loose, Iightweight materiais
take 4dlO psyehie damage. On a sueeessful save, the brought into the wall fly upward. Arrows, bolts, and
spell ends for that ereature. other ordinary projectiles launehed at targets behind
the wall are deflected upward and automatically miss.
WIND WALK (Boulders hurled by giants or siege engines, and similar
projectiles, are unaffeeted.) Creatures in gaseous form
6th-levei transmutation can't pass through il.

Casting Time: I minute WISH
Range: 30 feet 9th-levei conjuration
Components: V, S, M (/ire and holy water)
Duration: 8 hours Casting Time: I aelion
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous

Wish is the mightiest spell a mortal ereature can
easl. By simply speaking aloud, you can alter the very
foundations of reality in accord with your desires.

The basic use of this spell is to duplieate any other
spell of 8th levei or lower. Vou don't need to meet any
requirements in that spell, including costly eomponents.
The spell simply takes effecl.

Alternatively, you ean ereate one of the following
effecls of your ehoice:

Vou ereale one object of up to 25,000 gp in value thal
isn't a magic item. The objeel ean be no more than

288 PART 3 I SPELLS


300 feet in any dimension, and it appears in an unoc- also ends if the target is ever outside the spell's range or
cupied space you can see on the ground, if it has total cover from you.
Vou allow up to twenty creatures that you can see to
regain ali hit points, and you end ali effects on them At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
described in the greater restoration spel!. a spell slot of 2nd levei ar higher, the initial damage
Vou grant up to ten creatures that you can see resis- increases by ldl2 for each slot levei above 1st.
tance to a damage type you choose.
Vou grant up to ten creatures you can see immunity to WORD OF RECALL
a single spell or other magical effect for 8 hours. For 6th-ievel conjuration
instance, you could make yourself and ali your com-
panions immune to a Iich's Iife drain attack. Casting Time: I action
Vou undo a single recent event by forcing a reroll of Range: 5 feet
any roll made within the last round (including your Components: V
last tum). Reality reshapes itself to accommodate the Duration: Instantaneous
new result. For example, a wish spell could undo an
opponent's successful save, a foe's criticai hit, or a Vou and up to five willing creatures within 5 feet of you
friend's failed save. Vou can force the reroll to be made instantly teleport to a previously designated sanctuary.
with advantage or disadvantage, and you can choose Vou and any creatures that teleport with you appear in
whether to use the reroll or the original roll. the nearest unoccupied space to the spot you designated
when you prepared your sanctuary (see below). ]f you
Vou might be able to achieve something beyond the cast this spell without first preparing a sanctuary, the
scope of the above examples. State your wish to the DM spell has no effect.
as precisely as possible. The DM has great latitude in
ruling what occurs in such an instance; the greater the Vou must designate a sanctuary by casting this spell
wish, the greater the Iikelihood that something goes within a location, such as a temple, dedicated to or
wrong. This spell might simply fail, the effect you desire strongly Iinked to your deity. If you attempt to cast the
might only be partly achieved, or you might suffer some spell in this manner in an area that isn't dedicated to
unforeseen consequence as a result of how you worded your deity, the spell has no effect.
the wish. For example, wishing that a villain were dead
might propel you forward in time to a period when that WRATHFUL SMITE
villain is no longer alive, effectively removing you from 1st-ievei evocation
the game. Similarly, wishing for a legendary magic item
or artifact might instantly transport you to the presence Casting Time: I bonus action
of the item's current owner. Range:Self
Components: V
The stress of casting this spell to produce any effect Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
other than duplicating another spell weakens you. After
enduring that stress, each time you cast a spell until The next time you hit with a melee weapon attack
you finish a long rest, you take IdlO necrotic damage during this spell's duration, your attack deals an extra
per leveI of that spel!. This damage can't be reduced or Id6 psychic damage. Additionally, if the target is a
prevented in any way. In addition, your Strength drops creature, it must make a Wisdom saving throw or be
to 3, if it isn't 3 or lower already, for 2d4 days. For each frightened of you until the spell ends. As an action, the
of those days that you spend resting and doing nothing creature can make a Wisdom check against your spell
more than Iight activity, your remaining recovery time save DC to steel its resolve and end this spel!.
decreases by 2 days. Finally, there is a 33 percent
chance that you are unable to cast wish ever again if you ZONE OF TRUTH
suffer this stress. 2nd-ievei enchantment

WITCH BOLT Casting Time: I action
1st-levei evocation Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Casting Time: I action Duration: 10 minutes
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a twig from a tree that has been Vou create a magical zone that guards against deception
in a 15-foot-radius sphere centered on a point of your
struck by lightning) choice within range. Until the spell ends, a creature
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute that enters the spell's area for the first time on atum
or starts its tum there must make a Charisma saving
A beam of crackling, blue energy lances out toward throw. On a failed save, a creature can't speak a
a creature within range, forming a sustained are of deliberate lie while in the radius. Vou know whether
Iightning between you and the target. Make a ranged each creature succeeds or fails on its saving throw.
spell attack against that creature. On a hit, the target
takes Idl2 lightning damage, and on each ofyour tums An affected creature is aware of the spell and can thus
for the duration, you can use your action to deal ldl2 avoid answering questions to which it would normally
lightning damage to the target automatically. The spell respond with alie. Such a creature can be evasive in
ends if you use your action to do anything else. The spell its answers as long as it remains within the boundaries
af lhe lrulh.

PART 3 I SPELLS 289


ApPENDIX A: CONDITIONS

ONDITIONS ALTER A CREATURE'S CAPABIUTlES IN The charmer has advantage on any ability check to
interact socially with the creature,
a variety of ways and can arise as a result of
a spell, a class feature, a monster's attack, DEAFENED
or other effect, Most conditions, such as • A deafened creature can't hear and automatically fails
blinded, are impairments, but a few, such as
invisible, can be advantageous, any ability check that requires hearing,
A condition lasts either until it is countered
(the prone condition is countered by standing FRIGHTENED
up, for example) or for a duration specified by the effect A frightened creature has disadvantage on ability
that imposed the condition, checks and attack rolls while the source of its fear is
If multi pie effects impose the same condition on a within line of sight.
creature, each instance of the condition has its own The creature can't willingly move closer to the source
duration, but the condition's effects don't get worse, of its fear,
A creature either has a condition or doesn't.
The following definitions specify what happens to GRAPPLED
a creature while it is subjected to a condition, A grappled creature's speed becomes O,and it can't
benefit from any bonus to its speed.
BUNDED The condition ends if the grappler is incapacitated
A blinded creature can't see and automatically fails (see the condition),
any ability check that requires sight. The condition also ends if an effect removes the
Atlack rolls against the creature have advantage. and grappled creature fram the reach of the grappler or
the creature's atlack ralls have disadvantage, grappling effect, such as when a creature is hurled
away by the thunderwave spell.
CHARMED
A charmed creature can't attack the charmer or target INCAPACITATED
the charmer with harmful abilities or magical effects, An incapacitated creature can't take actions or
reactions.


INVISIBLE •• •••
An invisible creature is impossible to see without the EXHAUSTION
aid of magic or a special sense. For the purpose of
hiding, the creature is heavily obscured. The crea- Some special abilities and environmental hazards, such as
ture's location can be detected by any noise it makes starvation and the long-term effects offreezing or scorching
or any tracks it leaves. temperatures, can lead to a special condition called
Attack rolls against the creature have disadvantage, exhaustion. Exhaustion is measured in six leveis. An effect
and the creature's attack rolls have advantage. can give a creature one or more leveis Df exhaustion, as
specified in the effect's description.
PARALYZED
A paralyzed creature is incapacitated (see the condi- Levei Elfeel
tion) and can't move or speak. 1 Disadvantage on ability checks
The creature aulomatically fails Strength and 2 Speed halved
Dexterity saving throws. 3 Disadvantage on attack rolls and saving throws
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 4 Hit point maximum halved
Any attack that hits the creature is a criticai hit if the 5 Speed reduced to O
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature. 6 Death

PETRIFIED If an already exhausted creature suffers another effeet that
A petrified creature is transformed, along with any causes exhaustion, its current levei af exhaustion increases
nonmagical object it is wearing or carrying, into a by the amount specified in the effect's description.
solid inanimate substance (usually stone). Its weight
increases by a factor of ten, and it ceases aging. A creature suffers the effect ofits current levei of
The creature is incapacitated (see the condition), can't exhaustion as well as alllower leveis. For example, a creature
move or speak, and is unaware of its surroundings. suffering levei 2 exhaustion has its speed halved and has
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. disadvantage on ability checks.
The creature automatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws. An effect that removes exhaustion reduces its levei as
The creature has resistance to ali damage. specified in the effect's description, with ali exhaustion
The creature is immune to poison and disease, effects ending if a creature's exhaustion levei is reduced
although a poison or disease already in its system below 1.
is suspended, not neutralized.
Finishing a long rest reduces a creature's exhaustion levei
by 1, provided that the creature has also ingested some
food and drink.

INVISIBLE

DEAFENEO

APPENDIX A. CONDITIONS


PorSONED PRONE ReSTRAINEO
A poisoned creature has disadvantage on attack rolls
and ability checks. •• • o• •

PRONE o
A prone creature's only movement option is to crawl, o
unless it stands up and thereby ends the condition.
The creature has disadvantage on attack rolls. ()
An attack roll against the creature has advantage
if the attacker is within 5 feet of the creature.
Otherwise, the attack roll has disadvantage.

RESTRAINED
A restrained creature's speed becomes 0, and it can't
benefit from any bonus to its speed.
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage,
and the creature's attack rolls have disadvantage.
The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity
saving throws.

STUNNED
A stunned creature is incapacitated (see the
condition), can't move, and can speak only
falteringly.
The creature automatica11y fails Strength
and Dexterity saving throws.
Attack ro11sagainst the creature have
advantage.

UNCONSCIOUS
An unconscious creature is incapacitated (see
the condition), can't move or speak, and is unaware
of its surroundings
The creature drops whatever it's holding and fa11s
prone.
The creature automatica11y fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
Attack ro11sagainst the creature have advantage.
Any altack that hits the creature is a criti.
cal hit if the attacker is within 5 feet
of the creature.

UNCONSCIOUS STUNNEO

APPENDIX A I CONDITIONS


ApPENDIX B: GODS OF THE MULTIVERSE

ELIGION ISAN IMPORTANT PART OF LIFE IN GREYHAWK

THE worlds of the D&D multiverse. When The gods of Greyhawk come from at least four different
gods walk the world, clerics channel divine pantheons, representing the faiths of the various ethnic
power, evil cults perform dark sacrifices in groups that populated lhe continent of Oerik over the
subterranean lairs, and shining paladins ages. As a result, there's a great deal of overlap in lheir
stand Iike beacons against the darkness, it's portfolios: Pelor is the Flan god of the sun and Pholtus
hard to be ambivalent about the deities and is the Oeridian sun god, for example.
deny thei r existence.
Many people in the worlds of D&D worship different DRAGONLANCE
gods at different times and eircumstances. People in
the Forgotten Realms, for example. might pray to Sune The gods of the world of Krynn are three families: seven
for luck in love, make an offering to Waukeen before gods of good headed by Paladine and Mishakal, seven of
heading to the market, and pray to appease Talos when neutrality headed by Gilean, and seven of evil headed by
a severe storm blows in-ali in the same day. Many Takhisis and Sargonnas. These deities have been called
people have a favorite among the gods, one whose ideais by many different names and held in varying leveis of
and teachings they make their own. And a few people esteem by different peoples and cultures through the
dedicate themselves entirely to a single god, usually world's history, but they are the only gods of this world-
serving as a priest or champion of lhat god's ideais. their place fixed in the stars as constellations.
Your DM determines which gods, if any, are worshiped
in his or her campaign. From among the gods available, EBERRON
you can choose a single deity for your character to
serve, worship, or pay Iip service to. ar you can pick The world of Eberron has many different religions, but
a few that your character prays to most often. ar just the most important revolves around a pantheon called
make a mental note of lhe gods who are revered in your the Sovereign Host and their malign shadow, the Dark
DM's campaign so you can invoke their names when Six. The gods of the Sovereign Host are thought to have
appropriate. ]f you're playing a deric or a character with dominion over every aspect of existence, and to speak
the Acolyte background, decide which god your deity with a unified voice. But the Dark Six are the primitive,
serves or served, and consider the deity's suggested bloody, and cruel gods who offer a dissenting voice.
domains when selecting your character's domain.
Eberron's other religions are very different from the
D&D PANTHEONS traditional D&D pantheons. The monotheistic Church
of the Silver Flame is devoted to fighting against evil in
Each world in the D&D multiverse has its own the world, but plagued by corruption in its own ranks.
pantheons of deities, ranging in size from the teeming The philosophy of the Blood of Vol teaches that divinity
pantheons of the Forgotten Realms and Greyhawk to Iies within ali mortal beings and reveres the undead
the more focused religions of Eberron and Dragonlance. who have secured lhat immortality. Various mad cults
Many of the nonhuman races worship the same gods on are devoted to the demons and horrors imprisoned
different worlds-Moradin, for example, is revered by in Eberron's Underdark (called Khyber, lhe Dragon
dwarves of the Forgotten Realms, Greyhawk, and many Below). The followers of the Path of Light believe that
other worlds. the world is heading toward a glorious future where
the shadows that cloud this world will be transformed
THE FORGOTTEN REALMS into Iight. And two relaled nations of e1ves revere their
ancestral spirits: lhe Undying Court, preserved as
Dozens of deities are revered, worshiped, and feared spirits or even undead forms, and the glorified Spirits
throughout the world of the Forgotten Realms. At least of the Past, the great heroes of aneient wars.
thirly deities are widely known across the Realms, and
many more are worshiped locally, by individual tribes, NONHUMAN DEITIES
small cults, or certain sects of larger religious tem pies.
Certain gods closely associated with nonhuman races
""" ••• are revered on many different worlds, though not always
in the same way. The nonhuman races of the Forgotten
THE lIFE ANO DEATH DOMAINS Realms and Greyhawk share these deities.

Many deities in this section suggest the Life domain, •• Nonhuman races often have whole pantheons of
particularly if they are dosely associated with healing, their own. Besides Moradin, for example, the dwarf
protection, childbirth, nurturing, ar fertility. As described in gods include Moradin's wife, Berronar Truesilver, and
the chapter 3, though, the Life domain is incredibly broad, a number of other gods thought to be their children
and a deric of any non-evil deity can choose il. and grandchildren: Abbathor, Clangeddin Silverbeard,
Dugmaren Brightmantle, Dumathoin, Gorm Gullhyn,
A number of other deities, mostly evil ones, suggest the Haela Brightaxe, Marthammor Duin, Sharindlar, Thard
Death domain, which is detailed in the Dungeon Mas!er's Harr, and Vergadain. Individual dans and kingdoms of
Cuide. Most derics who choose this domain are evil N PCs, dwarves might revere some, ali, or none of these deities,
but if you want to worship a god af death, consult your and some have other gods unknown (or known by other
Dungeon Master . names) to outsiders.

••

APPENOIX B I CO os OF THE MULTIVERSE 293


DEITIES OF THE FORGOTTEN REALMS Suggested Domains Symbol
Nature, Tempest Six.pointed snowflake
Deity Alignment Knowledge Left hand pointing upward, outlined in fire
Auril, goddess of winter NE War Upright black right hand, thumb and fingers together
Azuth, god of wizards LN Trickery Black antlers
Bane, god of tyranny Death Skull surrounded bya ring of blood droplets
Beshaba, goddess of misfortune LE Life Sheaf of grain or a blooming rose over grain
Bhaal, god of murder Trickery White jawless skull on black or purple sunburst
Chauntea, goddess of agriculture CE Knowiedge Lit candle above an open eye
Cyric, god of lies NE Life, Nature Waterfall plunging into still pool
Deneir, god ofwriting NG Knowledge Toothed cog with four spokes
Eldath, goddess of peace CE Life, Light Staring eye on upright left gauntlet
Gond, god of craft NG Life Hands bound at the wrist with red cord
Helm, god of protection NG Death Upright skeletal arm holding balanced scales
limater, god of endurance N Life, Light Road traveling into a sunrise
Kelemvor, god of the dead LN Trickery Point.down triangle containing a swirl of mist
Lathander, god of birth and renewal LG Life Triangle of three six.pointed stars
Leira, goddess of i1lusion LN Death Nine.tailed barbed scourge
L1iira, goddess of joy NG Nature Clawed paw
Loviatar, goddess of pain CN Trickery Black mask
Malar, god of the hunt CG Nature Unicorn's head
Mask, god of thieves Light Five.stringed harp made of leaves
Mielikki, goddess of forests LE Death White human skull
Milil, god of poetry and song Knowledge Orcle af seven stars, or nine stars encircling a
Myrkul, god of death CE flowing red mist, or a single star
Mystra, goddess of magic CN Knowledge Blank scroll
NG Knowledge Crystal ball containing many kinds of eyes
NG Knowledge, Life Pair of eyes surrounded by seven stars
NE Death, Trickery Black disk encircled with a border
NG Nature Oak leaf
Life, Light Face of a beautiful red.haired woman
Oghma, god of knowledge N Death Three teardrops on a triangle
Savras, god of divination and fate LN Tempest Three lightning bolts radiating from a central point
SelOne, goddess of the moon CG War Upright flaming sword
Shar, goddess of darkness and 1055 War White right gauntlet
Silvanus, god of wild nature NE Trickery Face.up coin
Sune, goddess of love and beauty War Balanced scales resting on a warhammer
Talona, goddess of disease and poison N Tempest Wave curling left and right
Talos, god of storms Knowledge, Trickery Upright coin with Waukeen's profile facing left
Tempus, god of war CG
Torm, god of courage and self.sacrifice CE
Tymora, goddess of good fortune CE
Tyr, god of justice
Umberlee, goddess of the sea N
Waukeen, goddess of trade LG

CG

LG
CE
N

\

294 APPEN[)IX B i OODS OF TIIE MULTIVERSE


DElllES OF GREYHAWK Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
N Nature Green disk
Deity N Knowledge Eye within a pentagram
Beory, goddess of nature N Knowledge Arc of seven stars inside a cirele
Boccob, god of magic NG Life, Nature Unicorn horn
Ce[estian, god of stars and wanderers CE War Blood drop
Ehlonna, goddess of woodlands NG Know[edge, lrickery Cirele crossed by a curved horizon line
Erythnul, god of envy and slaughter LG War Lightning bolt
Fharlanghn, god ofhorizons and travei LE War Six arrows facing downward in a fan
Heironeous, god of chivalry and valor CG lempest, War Four spears and four maces radiating out
Hextor, god of war and discord from a central point
Kord, god of athletics and sport Death Reptilian eye with a horizontal diamond
Know[edge Weaver's spindle with three strands
Incabulos, god of plague and famine NE Death Grinning human skull
Istus, goddess of fate and destiny N Death Skull with either a sickle or a scythe
luz, god of pain and oppression CE Nature Oak leaf and acorn
Nerull, god of death NE lrickery Laughing mask
Obad.Hai, god of nature N Life, Light Sun
Olidammara, god of revelry CN Light Silver sun or fu[1 moon partia[ly eelipsed bya
Pelor, god ofthe sun and hea[ing NG smaller crescent moon
Pholtus, god of [ight and law LG Trickery Three bone fate.casting sticks
Know[edge White heart
Ralishaz, god of illluck and insanity CN Knowledge Cirele at the center of a starburst of [ines
Rao, god of peace and reason LG Trickery Dark spiral or inverted ziggurat
St. Cuthbert, god of common sense and zeal LN War lriskelion
lharizdun, god of eterna[ darkness CE Life, War Mountain with a cirele at its heart
Trithereon, god ofliberty and retribution CG Knowledge Hand with eye in the paim
Ulaa, goddess of hills and mountains LG Death, Knowledge Red skull in front of fireba[1
Vecna, god of evil secrets NE
Wee las, goddess of magic and death LN

DElllES OF DRAGONLANCE Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
LG War Silver triangle
lhe Gods of Good NG Light Bard's harp
Paladine, god of rulers and guardians NG Nature, Tempest Blue bird
Branchala, god of music LG War Bison's horns
Habbakuk, god of animal rife and the sea LG Knowledge Copper spider
Kiri.Jolith, god ofhonor and war LG Knowledge, Life B[ue infinity sign
Majere, god of meditation and order LG no c1erics White circle or sphere
Mishakal, goddess of healing
Solinari, god of good magic Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
N Knowledge Open book
lhe Gods of Neutrality N Nature Feather
Gilean, god ofknowledge N Know[edge Forging hammer
Chis[ev, goddess of nature N Knowledge, Trickery Griffon's wing
Reorx, god of craft N Nature Mu[ti.colored fire
Shinare, goddess of wea[th and trade N Knowledge Great green or gold tree
Sirrion, god offire and change N no c1erics Red circ[e or sphere
Zivilyn, god of wisdom
Lunitari, goddess of neutral magic Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
LE Death B[ack crescent
lhe Gods of Evil LE Death Ye[low skull
Takhisis, goddess of night and hatred CE Trickery Broken merchant's scales
Chemosh, god of the undead NE Death Hood with two red eyes
Hiddukel, god oflies and greed LE War Sty[ized red condor
Morgion, god of disease and secrecy CE Tempest Turtle shell
Sargonnas, god ofvengeance and fire LE no derics Black cirele or sphere
Zeboim, goddess of the sea and storms
Nuitari, god of evil magic

APPENDIX B I GODS OF THE MULTI" ERSE 295


DEITIES OF EBERRON Alignmenl Suggesled Domains Symbol
NG Life, Nalure Sheaf of wheallied wilh green ribbon
The Sovereign Hosl LN Knowledge Open lome
Arawai, goddess offerlilily N Life, Nalure Pair of anllers
Aureon, god oflaw and knowledge LG Life Fire in a slone hearlh
Balinor, god ofbeasls and lhe hunl LG Lighl, War Rising sun
Boldrei, goddess of communily and home CG War Longsword crossed over a shield
Doi Arrah, goddess of sunlighl and honor N Trickery Nine-sided gold coin
Doi Dorn, god of slrenglh aI arms NG Life, Trickery Domino
Kol Korran, god of Irade and weallh NG Knowledge Crossed hammer and tongs
Olladra, goddess of good forlune
Onalar, god of crafl Alignmenl Suggesled Domains Symbol
NE Tempest Bundle of five sharpened bones
The Dark Si. NE War Winged wyrm wilh woman's head and
The Devourer, god of nature's wralh upper body
The Fury, goddess ofwralh and madness NE Death Dragonshard stone in the shape of a fang
NE War Five blood-spatlered tools
The Keeper, god of greed and dealh CE Knowledge Obsidian tower
The Mockery, god of violence and treachery CN Knowledge, Trickery Four crossed, rune-inscribed bones
The Shadow, god of dark magic
The Traveler, deity of chaos and change Alignmenl Suggesled Domains Symbol
LG Life, Light, War Flame drawn on silver or molded from silver
Olher Failhs of Eberron LN Death, Life Slylized dragon skull on red teardrop gem
The Silver Flame, deily of protection and good
The Blood ofVol, philosophy ofimmortality NE Trickery Varies
LN Life, Lighl Brilliant cryslal
and undeath
Cults of the Dragon Below, deities of madness NG Knowledge, Life Varies
The PaI h of Light, philosophy of light and CG War Varies

self-improvemenl
The Undying Courl, elven ancestors
The Spirits of the Past, elven ancestors

NONHUMAN DEITIES Alignmenl Suggesled Domains Symbol
LG Life, War Dragon's head in profile
Deily NE Death Lobster head or black pearl
Bahamut, dragon god of good CG Light Quarter moon or starburst
Blibdoolpoolp, kuo-toa goddess CG Nature, Tempest Dolphin
Corellon Larethian, elf deity of art and magic N Nature, Tempest Spiral design
Deep Sashelas, elf god of the sea LG Trickery Gold nugget
Eadro, merfolk deity ofthe sea CE War Wooden c1ub
Gari Glitlergold, gnome god oflrickery and wiles CE Tempest, War Unblinking eye
Grolantor, hill giant god of war CE War Morningstar
Gruumsh, ore god of storms and war LE War Gnome skull
Hruggek, bugbear god ofviolence CE Death Image ofthe lizardjload god
Kurtulmak, kobold god of war and mining CE Trickery Spider
Laogzed, troglodyte god ofhunger LE War Bloodyaxe
Lolth, drow goddess of spiders LG Knowledge Hammer and anvil
Maglubiyel, goblinoid god of war CG Nature Oak
Moradin, dwarf god of crealion CG Knowledge Crescent moon
Rillifane Rallathil, wood elf god of nature LE Nature, Tempesl Shark
Sehanine Moonbow, elf goddess of the moon N Life Egg
Sekolah, sahuagin god of lhe hunt N Nature Oak growing from acorn
Semuanya, lizardfolk deity of survival N Knowledge Slalactite
Skerrit, centaur and satyr god of nature LE Knowledge, War Flaming sword
Skoraeus Stonebones, god of stone gianls and arl CE War White double-bladed axe
Surlur, god offire giants and craft LE Trickery Dragon head with five claw marks
Thrym, god of frost giants and strength LG Life Shield
Tiamat, dragon goddess of evil
Yondalla, halfling goddess of ferlility and protection

296 APPEND1X B I GODS or THE MU LTIVERSE


FANTASy-HISTORICAL PANTHEONS

The Celtic, Egyptian, Greek, and Norse pantheons are
fantasy interpretations of historical religions from our
world's ancient times. They include deities tha! are
most appropriate for use in a 0&0 game, divorced from
their historical context in the real world and united into
pantheons that serve the needs of the game.

THE CELTlC PANTHEON

It's said that something wild lurks in the heart of every
soul, a space that thrills to the sound of geese calling
aI night, to the whispering wind through the pines, to
the unexpected red of mistletoe on an oak-and it is in
this space that the Celtic gods dwell. They sprang from
the brook and stream, their might heighlened by lhe
strength of the oak and lhe beauty of the woodlands and
open moor. When the first forester dared put a name to
the face seen in the bole of a tree or the voice babbling
in a brook, these gods forced themselves into being.

The Celtic gods are as often served by druids as by
c1erics. for they are c10sely aligned with the forces of
nature lhat druids revere.

THE GREEK PANTHEON

The gods of Olympus make lhemselves known wilh the
gentle lap of waves against the shores and lhe crash of
the thunder among the c1oud-enshrouded peaks. The
thick boar-infested woods and the sere, olive-covered
hillsides hold evidence of their passing. Everyaspect
of nature echoes with their presence, and they've made
a place for themselves inside the human hearl, 100.

THE EGYPTIAN PANTHEON

These gods are a young dynasty of an ancienl divine
family, heirs to the rulership of lhe cosmos and lhe
mainlenance of the divine principie of Ma'al-lhe
fundamental order of lrulh, juslice, law, and order lhal
puts gods, mortal pharaohs, and ordinary men and
women in lhcir logical and rightful place in lhe universe.

The Egyptian panlheon is unusual in having lhree
gods wilh the Dealh domain of differenl alignmenls.
Anubis is lhe lawful neulral god of lhe aflerlife, who


judges lhe souls of lhe dead. Set is a chaotic evil god lhe needs of lheir environment. Given lhe necessity of
of murder, perhaps besl known for killing his brother raiding for food and wealth, il's surprising lhe mortais
Osiris. And Nephlhys is a chaolic good goddess of lurned out as well as lhey did. Their powers reflecl
mourning. Thus, allhough most c1erics of lhe Dealh the need lhese warriors had for slrong leadership and
domain (found in lhe Dungeon Master's Cuide) are decisive action. Thus, lhey see lheir deities in every
villainous characlers, c1erics who serve Anubis or bend of a river, hear them in lhe crash of lhe thunder
Nephlhys need nol be. and lhe booming of lhe glaciers, and smell them in lhe
smoke of a burning longhouse.
THE NORSE PANTHEON
Where lhe land plummels from the snowy hills inlo lhe The Norse pantheon includes two main families, the
icy fjords below, where lhe longboals draw up on lo lhe Aesir (deilies of war and destiny) and lhe Vanir (gods
beach, where the glaciers flow forward and relreal wilh of ferlilily and prosperily). Once enemies, these lwo
every fali and spring-lhis is lhe land of the Vikings, families are now c10sely allied againsl lheir common
the home of lhe Norse panlheon. It's a brulal clime, enemies, the gianls (including lhe gods Surlur and
and one lhal calls for brulalliving. The warriors of Thrym). Like lhe gods of Greyhawk, gods in different
the land have had lo adapl lo lhe harsh condilions in families somelimes have overlap in their spheres of
order lO survive, but lhey haven't been 100 lwisled by influence: Frey (of lhe Vanir) and Odur (of the Aesir)
are both associated with lhe sun, for example.

CELTIC DEITIES Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
Nature, Trickery Bubbling cauldron or shield
Deity CG Life, Death Black star on gray background
The Daghdha, god of wealher and crops NE Light Solar disk and standing stones
Arawn, god oflife and dealh NG Life Footbridge
Belenus, god of sun, light, and warmth Life Crossed oak and mistletoe branches
Briganlia, goddess of rivers and livestock NG Nature Red sun-capped mountain peak
Diancecht, god of medicine and healing LG Knowledge, Life Giant mallet over sword
Dunatis, god of mountains and peaks N Knowledge, Life Pair of long hands
Goibhniu, god of smiths and healing NG Nature, Tempest Wave of white water on green
Lugh, god of arts, travei, and commerce Knowledge Staff
Manannan mac Lir, god of oceans and sea creatures CN War Two crossed spears
Math Mathonwy, god of magic War Silver hand on black background
Morrigan, goddess ofbattle LN Knowledge Unfurled scroll
Nuada, god of war and warriors NE Nature Summer oak tree
Oghma, god of speech and writing CE
Silvanus, god of nature and forests N

NG

N

GREEK DEITlES Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
N Tempest Fist full of lightning bolts
Deity CG Light Sea shell
Zeus, god of the sky, ruler of the gods CG Knowledge, Life, Light Lyre
Aphrodite, goddess of love and beauty CE War Spear
Apollo, god of light, music, and healing Life, Nature Bow and arrow on lunar disk
Ares, god of war and strife NG Knowledge, War Owl
Artemis, goddess ofhunting and childbirth Life Mare's head
Athena, goddess of wisdom and civilization LG Life Thyrsus (staff tipped with pine cone)
Demeter, goddess of agriculture NG Death Black ram
Dionysus, god of mirth and wine Knowledge, Trickery Setting moon
Hades, god ofthe underworld CN Knowledge Hammer and anvil
Hecale, goddess of magic and the moon LE Trickery Fan of peacock feathers
Hephaestus, god of smithing and craft Tempest, War Lion's head
Hera, goddess of marriage and intrigue CE Trickery Caduceus (winged staff and serpents)
Hercules, god of strength and adventure NG Life Hearth
Hermes, god cf travei and commerce War Winged woman
Hestia, goddess of home and family CN Nature Syrinx (pan pipes)
Nike, goddess of victory CG Tempest Trident
Pan, god of nature Trickery Red pentagram
Poseidon, god of the sea and earthquakes CG
Tyche, goddess of good fortune NG
LN
CN

CN

N

APPENDlX B I GOuS OFTHE MULTIVERSE


ECYPTlAN DEITIEs Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
LG Life, Light Solar dísk encírcled by serpent
Deity LN Death Black jackal
Re-Horakhty, god ofthe sun, ruler ofthe gods NE Trickery Flaming snake
Anubis, god of judgment and death CG War Cat
Apep, god of evil, fire, and serpents CN Tríckery Image ofthe misshapen deíty
Bast, goddess of cats and vengeance NG Life, Light Horned cow's head with lunar disk
Bes, god of luck and musíc
Hathor, goddess of love, music, and NG Knowledge Step pyramid
NG Knowledge, Life Ankh and star
motherhood CG Death Horns around a lunar dísk
Imhotep, god of crafts and medicine LG Life, Nature Crook and fiail
Isis, goddess of fertilíty and magíc LN Knowledge Buli
Nephthys, goddess of death and grief CE Death, Tempest, Coiled cobra
Osiris, god of nature and the underworld
Ptah, god of crafts, knowledge, and secrets Trickery Crocodile head with horns and plumes
Set, god of darkness and desert storms LE Nature, Tempest Ibis
N Knowledge
Sobek, god of water and crocodiles
Thoth, god of knowledge and wisdom

NORSE DEITIES Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
NG Knowledge, War Watching blue eye
Deity NE Tempest Rough ocean waves
Odin, god ofknowledge and war NG Life, Light Gem-encrusted silver chalice
Aegir, god of the sea and storms N Light Head of a bearded man
Balder, god of beauty and poetry NG Life, Light Ice-blue greatsword
Forsetí, god ofjustice and law NG Life Falcon
Frey, god of fertilíty and the sun N Life, Light Cat
Freya, goddess of fertility and love LG Light, War Curling musical horn
Frigga, goddess ofbirth and fertility NE Death Woman's face, rottíng on one side
Heimdall, god of watchfulness and loyalty CN Trickery Winged scroll
Hei, goddess of the underworld CE Trickery Flame
Hermod, god of luck NG Nature, Tempest Gold coin
Loki, god of thíeves and trickery CG Light Solar disk
Njord, god of sea and wind CG War Upraísed sword
Odur, god oflíght and the sun N Nature Mountain peak
Síf, goddess of war LE War Flaming sword
Skadi, god of earth and mountains CG Tempest, War Hammer
Surtur, god of fire giants and war CE War White double-bladed axe
Thor, god of storms and thunder LN Knowledge, War Sword
Thrym, god of fire giants and cold CN Nature Longbow
Tyr, god of courage and strategy
Uller, god ofhunting and winter

J

f

APPENOIX B I CO os OF THE MULTIVfRSE 299
c:ApPENDIX THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE

NCREDlBLYVAST lS THE COSMOS OF THE The best-known worlds in lhe multiverse are lhe
ones lha! have been published as official campaign
DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame, which teems settings for the 0&0 game over the years-Greyhawk,
Blackmoor, Dragonlance, the Forgotten Realms,
r with a multitude of worlds as weJl as myriad Mystara, Birthright, Dark Sun, and Eberron, among
alternate dimensions of reality, calIed the planes others. Each of these worlds boasts its own cast of
of existence. lt encompasses every world heroic adventurers and scheming villains, its own
where Dungeon Masters run their adventures, ancient ruins and forgotten artifacts, its own dungeons
alI within the relatively mundane realm of the and its own dragons. But if your campaign takes place
Material Plane. Beyond lhat plane are domains on one of these worlds, it belongs to your DM-you
of raw elemental matter and energy, realms of pure mighl imagine it as one of thousands of paralIel versions
thought and ethos, the homes of demons and angels, of the world, which might diverge wildly from the
and the dominions of the gods. published version.
Many spelIs and magic items can draw energy
from these planes, summon the creatures that dwelI MATERIAL ECHOES
there, communicate with their denizens, and alIow
advenlurers to travei there. As your character achieves The Material Plane is a richly magical place, and its
greater power and higher leveIs, you might undertake magical nalure is reflected in the two planes that share
a quest to rescue a friend fram the horrific depths of its central place in the multiverse. The Feywild and the
the Abyss, or find yourself hoisting a tankard with lhe ShadowfelI are paralIel dimensions occupying the same
friendly giants of Ysgard. Vou might walk on streets cosmological space, so they are often calIed echo planes
made of solid fire or lest your mettle on a battlefield
where lhe falIen are resurrected with each dawn. or mirrar planes to the Material Plane. The worlds and
landscapes of these planes mirror lhe natural world
THE MATERIAL PLANE of the Material Plane but reflect those fealures into

The Material Plane is the nexus where the philosophical different forms-more marvelous and magical in the
and elemental forces tha! define the other planes colIide Feywild, distorted and colorless in the Shadowfell.
in lhe jumbled existence of mortal life and mundane Where a volcano stands in the Malerial Plane, a
matter. AlI the worlds of 0&0 exist within the Material mountain topped with skyscraper-sized crystals that
Plane, making it the starting point for most campaigns glow with internai fire towers in lhe Feywild, and a
and adventures. The rest of the multiverse is defined in jagged rock outcrapping resembling a skuJl marks the
relation to the Material Plane.
spot on the Shadowfell.
The worlds of the Material Plane are infinitely diverse, The Feywild, also calIed the Plane of Faerie, is a land
for lhey reflect the creative imagination of the DMs
who set their games there, as weJl as the players whose of soft lights and wonder, a country of little people with
heroes adventure there. They include magic-wasled great desires, a place of music and death. lt is a realm
desert planets and island-dotted waler worlds, worlds of eternal twilight, with slow lanterns bobbing in the
where magic combines with advanced technology and gentle breeze and huge fireflies buzzing through graves
others trapped in an endless Stone Age, worlds where and fields. The sky is alight with the faded colors of
the gods walk and places they have abandoned. lhe setting, or perhaps rising, sun. But, in fact, the sun
neve r truly sets or rises; it remains stationary, dusky
POSITIVE PLANE
and low in the sky. Away fram the settled areas ruled by
OUTER PLANES
the Seelie Court, lhe land is a tangle of sharp-toothed
brambles and syrupy fens-perfect territory for the
Unseelie to hunt their prey. Fey creatures, such as those
brought to the world by conjure woad/and beings and
similar spelIs, dwelI in the Feywild.

The Shadowfell, also calIed the Plane af Shadaw, is

a darkly lighted dimension, a world af black and white
where colar has been leached fram everything. lt is a
place af taxic darkness that hates the light, where the
sky is a black vault with neither sun nor stars.

••• ••
POSITIVE ANO NEGATIVE PLANES

Like a dome above the other planes, the Positive Plane is the

source of radianl energy and lhe raw life force lhal suffuses

allliving beings, from lhe puny lo lhe sublime, Ils dark

-----------------------..refleclion is lhe Negative Plane, lhe source of necrolic energy

lhal deslroys lhe Iiving and animales lhe undead .

....•

300 APPENDIX C I THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE


BEYOND THE MATERIAL of force. The depths of the plane, the Deep Ethereal, are
a region of swirling mists and colorful fogs.
Beyond the Material Plane. the various planes of
existence are realms of myth and mystery. They're The Astral Plane is the realm of thought and dream.
not simply other worlds. but different qualities of where visitors traveI as disembodied souls to reach
being, formed and governed by spiritual and elemental the planes of the divine and demonic. It is a great,
principIes abstracted fram the ordinary world. silvery sea. the same above and below, with swirling
wisps of white and gray streaking among motes of light
PLANAR TRAVEL resembling distant stars. Erratic whirlpools of color
flicker in midair like spinning coins. Occasional bits of
When adventurers travei into other planes of existence, solid matter can be found here, but most of the Astral
they are undertaking a legendary journey acrass the Plane is an endless. open domain.
thresholds of existence to a mythic destination where
they strive to complete their quest. Such a journey is the INNER PLANES
stuff of legend. Braving the realms of the dead. seeking
out the celestial servants of a deity. or bargaining with The Inner Planes surround and enfold the Material
an efreeti in its home city will be the subject of song and Plane and its echoes, providing the raw elemental
story for years to come. substance from which ali the worlds were made. The
four Elemental Planes-Ai r, Earth. Fire, and Water-
TraveI to the planes beyond the Material Plane can be form a ring araund the Material Plane. suspended
accomplished in two ways: by casting a spell or by using within the churning Elemental Chaos.
a planar portal.
At their innermost edges. where they are closest
SpeJls. A number of spells allow direct or indirect to the Material Plane (in a conceptual if not a literal
access to other planes of existence. Plane shift and geographical sense). the four Elemental Planes
gate can transport adventurers directly to any other resemble a world in the Material Plane. The four
plane of existence. with different degrees of precision. elements mingle together as they do in the Material
Etherealness allows adventurers to enter the Ethereal Plane. forming land. sea. and sky. Farther from the
Plane and traveI fram there to any of the planes it Material Plane. though, the Elemental Planes are both
touches-the Shadowfell. the Feywild. or the Elemental alien and hostile. Here, the elements exist in their
Planes. And the astral projection spelllets adventurers purest form-great expanses of solid earth. blazing fire.
praject themselves into the Astral Plane and traveI to crystal-clear water, and unsullied air. These regions
the Outer Planes. are little-known. so when discussing the Plane of Fire.
for example, a speaker usually means just the border
Porta/s. A portal is a general term for a stationary region. At the farthest extents of the Inner Planes,
interplanar connection that links a specific location the pure elements dissolve and bleed together into an
on one plane to a specific location on another. Some unending tumult of clashing energies and colliding
portaIs are like doorways, a clear window, or a fog- substance, the Elemental Chaos.
shrauded passage, and simply stepping through it
effects the interplanar traveI. Others are locations- OUTER PLANES
circles of standing stones, soaring towers. sailing ships,
or even whole towns-that exist in multiple planes at If the Inner Planes are the raw matter and energy that
once or flicker from one plane to another in turno Some makes up the multiverse, the Outer Planes are the
are vortices, typically joining an Elemental Plane with a direction. thought and purpose for such construction.
very similar location on the Material Plane. such as the Accordingly. many sages refer to the Outer Planes as
heart of a voleano (leading to the Plane of Fire) or the divine planes, spiritual planes. or godly planes, for the
depths of the ocean (to the Plane of Water). Outer Planes are best known as the homes of deities.

TRANSITIVE PLANES When discussing anything to do with deities, the
language used must be highly metaphorical. Their
The Ethereal Plane and the Astral Plane are called the actual homes are not literally "places" at ali, but
Transitive Planes. They are mostly featureless realms exemplify the idea that the Outer Planes are realms of
that serve primarily as ways to traveI from one plane thought and spirit. As with the Elemental Planes, one
to another. Spells such as etherealness and astral can imagine the perceptible part of the Outer Planes as
projection allow characters to enter these planes and a sort of border region, while extensive spiritual regions
traverse them to reach the planes beyond. lie beyond ordinary sensory experience.

The Ethereal Plane is a misty, fog-bound dimension Even in those perceptible regions, appearances
that is sometimes described as a great oceano Its shores, can be deceptive. Initially. many of the Outer Planes
called the Border Ethereal. overlap the Material Plane appear hospitable and familiar to natives of the
and the lnner Planes, so that every location on those Material Plane. But the landscape can change at the
planes has a corresponding location on the Ethereal whims of the powerful forces that live on the Outer
Plane. Certain creatures can see into the Border Planes. The desires of the mighty forces that dwell on
Ethereal. and the see invisibility and true seeing spell these planes can remake them completely, effectively
grunt that ability. Some magical effects also extend fram erasing and rebuilding existence itself to bettcr fulfill
the Material Plane into the Border Ethereal. particularly their own needs.
effects that use force energy such as forcecage and wall

APPENDlx C I THE PL~NES Df FXISTENCE

3°1


Distance is a virtually meaningless concept on the planes. That argument might be circular, however,
Outer Planes. The perceptible regions of the planes for it is possible that the arrangement of the Outlands
often seem quite small, but they can also stretch on to inspired the idea of the Great Wheel in the first place.
what seems like infinity. It might be possible to take
a guided tour of the Nine Hells, from the first layer to Around the outside edge of the circle, evenly spaced,
the ninth, in a single day-if the powers of the Hells are the gate-towns: sixleen settlements, each built
desire il. Or it could take weeks for travelers to make a around a portal leading to one of the Outer Planes. Each
grueling trek across a single layer. town shares many of the characteristics of the plane
where its gate leads.
The most well-known Outer Planes are a group of
sixteen planes that correspond to the eight alignments At the center of the Outlands, like the axle of the
(excluding neutrality) and the shades of distinction planar wheel, the Spire shoots impossibly high into the
between them. sky. Above this thin peak floats the ring-shaped city of
Sigil, the City of Doors. This bustling planar metropolis
OUTER PLANES Alignment holds countless portais to other planes and worlds.

Outer Plane LG Sigil is a trader's city. Goods, merchandise, and
Mount Celestia, the Seven Heavens of NG, LG information come to it from across the planes. There
Bytopia, the Twin Paradises of is a brisk trade in information about the planes, in
Elysium, the Blessed Fields of NG particular in the command words or items required for
The Beastlands, the Wilderness of NG,CG the operation of particular portais. These portal keys
Arborea, the Olympian Glades of CG are highly sought after, and many travelers within the
Ysgard, the Heroie Domains of CN,CG city are looking for a particular portal or a portal key
Limbo, the Ever-Changing Chaos of CN to allow them to continue on their way.
Pandemonium, the Windswept Depths of CN,CE
The Abyss, the Innnite Layers of CE DEMIPLANES
Careeri, the Tarterian Depths of NE, CE Demiplanes are small extradimensional spaces with
Hades, the Gray Waste of NE their own unique rules. They are pieces of reality that
Gehenna, the Bleak Eternity of NE, LE don't se em to fit anywhere else. Demiplanes come
The Nine Hells (of Baator) LE into being by a variety of means. Some are created by
Aeheron, the Innnite Battleneld of LN, LE spells, such as demiplane, or generated at the desire of a
Meehanus, the Cloekwork Nirvana of powerful deity or other force. They may exist naturally,
Areadia, the Peaeeable Kingdoms of LN as a fold of existing reality that has been pinched olf
LN, LG from the rest of the multiverse, or as a baby universe
growing in power. A given demiplane can be entered
The planes with some element of good in their nature through a single point where it touches another plane.
are called the Upper Planes. Celestial creatures such Theoretically, a plane shift spell can also carry travelers
as angels and pegasi dwell in the Upper Planes. Planes to a demiplane, but the proper frequency required
with some element of evil are the Lower Planes. Fiends for the tuning fork is extremely hard to acquire. The
such as demons, devils, and yugoloths dwell in the gate spell is more reliable, assuming the caster knows
Lower Planes. A plane's alignment is its essence, and of the demiplane.
a character whose alignment doesn't match the plane's
experiences a profound sense of dissonance there. THE FAR REALM
When a good creature visits Elysium, for example, it The Far Realm is beyond the known muItiverse. In fact,
feels in tune with the plane, but an evil creature feels it might be an entirely separate multiverse with its own
out of tune and more than a little uncomfortable. physical and magical laws. Where stray energies from
the Far Realm leak onto another plane, life and matter
OTHER PLANES are warped and twisted into alien shapes that defy
ordinary geometry and biology.
Existing somehow between or beyond the known planes
of existence are a variety of other realms. The entities that abide in the Far Realm are toa alien
for a normal mind to accept without damage. Titanic
SIGIL AND THE OUTLANDS creatures swim through nothingness, preoccupied
The Outlands is the plane between the Outer Planes, a with madness. Unspeakable things whisper awful
plane of neutrality, but not the neutrality of nothingness. truths to those who dare listen. For mortais, knowledge
Instead it incorporates a little of everything, keeping it of the Far Realm Is a triumph of mind over the rude
ali in a paradoxical balance-simultaneously concordant boundaries of matter, space, and eventually sanity.
and in opposition. It is a broad region of varied terrain,
with open prairies, towering mountains, and twisting, There are no known portaIs lo the Far Realm, or
shallow rivers, strongly resembling an ordinary world at least none that are still viable. Ancient elves once
of the Material Plane. pierced the boundary of eons with a vast portal to the
Far Realm within a mountain called Firestorm Peak,
The Outlands is circular, like a great wheel-in fact, but their civilization imploded in bloody terror and
Ihose who envlsion the Ouler Planes as a wheel point the portaI's location-even its home world-is long-
to the Outlands as proof, calling il a microcosm of the forgotten. Other portaIs might still exist, marked by the
alien forces leaking through to corrupt the Material
Plane around them.

302 APPENDIX C I THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE


pOSITIVE PLANE

APPENDIX C THE PL\NES OF EXISTENCE '103


ApPENDIX D: CREATURE STATISTICS

PELLS AND CLASS FEATURES ALLOW CHARACTERS BOAR

to transform into animaIs, summon creatures Medium beasl, unaligned
to serve as familiars, and create undead.
Statistics for such creatures are grouped Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
in this appendix for your convenience. For Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
information on how to read a stat block, see Speed 40 ft.
the Monster Manual.

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 9 (-1) 5 (-3)

BAT Senses passive Perception 9
Languages -
Tiny beasl, unaligned Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

Armar Class 12 Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1) creature right before hitting it with a tusk attack, the target
Speed 5 ft., fly 30 ft. takes an extra 3 (1d6) slashing damage and must succeed on a
De 11 5trength saving throw or be knocked prone.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
2 (-4) 15 (+2) 8 (-1) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 4 (-3) Relentless (Recharges after the Boar Finishes a Short ar Long
Rest). If the boar takes damage that reduces it to O hit points,
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11 unless the damage is 7 or more or from a criticai hit, it drops to
Languages- 1 hit point instead.
Challenge 0(10 XP)
ACTlONS
Echolocation. While it can't hear, the bat has no blindsight.
Tusk. Melee Weopon Atlack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Keen Heoring. The bat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) slashing damage.
checks that rely on hearing.
BROWNBEAR
ACTlONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. Large beasl, una/igned
Hit: 1 piercing damage.

BLACKBEAR Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 34 (4d10 + 12)
Medium beasl, unaligned Speed 40 ft., c1imb 30 ft.

Armor Class 11 (natural armor) STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6) 19 (+4) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 2 (-4) 13 (+1) 7 (-2)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Skills Perception +3 13
15 (+2) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2) Senses passive Perception
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)

Skills Perception +3 13
Senses passive Perception
Languages - Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) checks that rely on smel!.

Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) ACTIONS
checks that rely on smel!. Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks, one with its bite and
one with its c1aws.
ACTIONS
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks, one with its bite and Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
one with its c1aws. H/t: 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage.

Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Claws. Melee Weapon Attock: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
H/t: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.

Claws. Melee Weapon Atlaek: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage.

APPENDIX o I CREATURE STATISTICS

3°4


CAT ACTIONS

Tiny beast, unaligned Bite. Melee Weopan Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one targel.
Hit: 7 (ldl0 + 2) piercing damage, and the target is grappled.
Armor Class 12 Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the
Hit Points 2 (ld4) crocodile can't bite another targel.
Speed 40 ft., c1imb 30 fI.

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA DIREWOLF
3 (-4) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 3 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Large beast, unaligned

Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Senses passive Perception 13 Hit Points 37 (5dl0 + 10)
Languages - Speed 50 fI.
Challenge O (10 XP)

Keen Smell. The cat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
checks that rely on smel!. 17 (+3) 15 (+2) 15 (+2) 3 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)

ACTIONS Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Claws. Melee Weapan Attaek: +0 to hit. reach 5 ft., one targel. Senses passive Perception 13
Hit: 1 slashing damage. Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)

CONSTRICTOR SNAKE Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smel!.
Large beast, unaligned
Paek Taeti,s. The wolf has advantage on atlack rolls against a
Armor Class 12 creature if at least one of the wolf's allies is within 5 feet of the
Hit Points 13 (2dl0 + 2) creature and isn't incapacitated.
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
ACTIONS
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 1 (-5) 10 (+0) 3 (-4) Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. Ifthe target is a creature,
Senses blindsight 10 fI.. passive Perception 10 it must succeed on a De 13 Strength saving throw or be
Languages - knocked prone.
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

FROG

Tiny beast, unaligned

ACTIONS Armor Class 11
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. Speed 20 fI., swim 20 ft.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
Constriet. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 1 (-5) 13 (+1) 8 (-1) 1 (-5) 8 (-1) 3 (-4)
creature. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the target
is grappled. Until this grapple ends, the creature is restrained,
and the snake can't constrict another target.

CROCODILE Skills Perception +1, Stealth +3 Perception 11
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive
Large beast, unaligned Languages -
Challenge O (O XP)

Armor Class 12 (natural armor) Amphibious. The frog can breathe air and water.
Hit Points 19 (3dl0 + 3)
Speed 20 ft., swim 30 fI. Standing Leap. As part ofits movement and without a running
start, the frog can long jump up to 10 feet and high jump
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA up to 5 feel.
15 (+2) 10 (+0) 13 (+1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 5 (-3)

Skills Stealth +2 10
Senses passive Perception
Languages -
Ch~lIenge 1/2 (100 XP)

Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 15 minutes.

APPENDIX o CRE \TURE STATISTICS 305


GIANTEAGLE Web (Recharge 5-6). Ranged Weapon Alloek: +5 lo hil, range
30 fl./60 fI., one crealure. H/I: The largel is reslrained by
Large beast, neutral good webbing. As an aclion, lhe reslrained largel can make a DC
12 51renglh check, bursling lhe webbing on a success. lhe
Armar Class 13 webbing can also be allacked and deslroyed (AC 10; hp 5;
Hil Poinls 26 (4dl0 + 4) vulnerabilily lo fire damage; immunily lo bludgeoning, paison,
Speed 10 fI., Ay 80 fI. and psychic damage).

SIR DEX CON INI WIS CHA HAWK (FALCON)
16 (+3) 17 (+3) 13 (+1) 8 (-1) 14 (+2) 10 {+O}
Tiny beasl, unaJigned
Skills Perceplion +4
Senses passive Perceplion 14 Common bul doesn'l Armar Class 13
Languages Gianl Eagle, underslands Hil Poinls 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 10 fI., Ay 60 fI.
speak il
Challenge 1 (200 XP)

Keen Sight. lhe eagle has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion) SIR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
checks Ihal rely on sighl. 5 (-3) 16 (+3) 8 (-1) 2 (-4) 14 (+2) 6 (-2)

ACIIONS Skills Perceplion +4 14
Mu/tiattack. lhe eagle makes Iwo allacks, one wilh ils beak Senses passive Perceplion
and one wilh ils lalons. Languages -
Challenge O (10 XP)
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
H/t: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage. Keen Sight. lhe hawk has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion)
checks Ihal rely on sighl.
Talons. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. ACTIONS
Talons. Melee Weopon Altaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
GIANT SPIDER Hit: 1 slashing damage.

Large beast, unaJigned

Armar Class 14 (nalural armar) IMP
Hil Poinls 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 30 fI., c1imb 30 fI. Tiny fiend (devi/, shapechanger), lawful evil

SIR DEX CON INI WIS CHA Armar Class 13
14 (+2) 16 (+3) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 11 (+O) 4 (-3) Hil Poinls 10 (3d4 + 3)
Speed 20 fI., Ay 40 ft. (20 fI. in ral form; 20 fI., Ay 60 fI. in raven

form; 20 fI., c1imb 20 fI. in spider form)

Skills Sleallh +7 60 fI., passive Perceplion 10 STR DEX CON INI WIS CHA
Senses blindsighll0 fI., darkvision 6 (-2) 17 (+3) 13 (+1) 11 {+O} 12 (+1) 14 (+2)
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Skills Deceplion +4, Insighl +3, Persuasion +4, Sleallh +5
Damage Resislances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
Spider Climb. lhe spider can c1imb diflicull surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, wilhoul needing lo make an from nonmagical weapons Ihal aren'l silvered
abilily check. Damage Immunilies fire, poison
Condilion Immunilies poisoned
Web Sense. While in conlacl wilh a web, lhe spider knows lhe Senses darkvision 120 fI., passive Perceplion 11
exacllocalion of any olher crealure in conlacl wilh lhe same web. Languages Infernal, Common
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Web Walker. lhe spider ignores movemenl reslriclions caused
by webbing. Shapechanger. lhe imp can use ils aclion lo polymorph inlo
lhe beasl form of a ral, a raven, ar a spider, ar inlo ils devil
ACTIONS formo 115slalislics are lhe same in each form, allhough ils
allack is dilferenl in some of Ihem. Any equipmenl il carries is
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one crealure. nollransformed. If slain, lhe imp reverls lo ils devil formo
H/t: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage, and lhe largel must make a
De 11 Conslilulion saving lhrow, laking 9 (2d8) poison damage Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn'l impede lhe
on a failed save, ar half as much damage on a successful one. If imp's darkvision.
lhe poison damage reduces lhe largel lo O hil poinls, lhe largel
is slable bul poisoned for 1 hour, and paralyzed while poisoned Magic Resistance. lhe imp has advanlage on saving lhrows
in lhis way. againsl spells and olher magical elfecls.

306 APPENDIX D I CREATURE STATISTlCS


ACTIONS Pounce. If the lion moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target right before hitting it with a c1aw attack, the target must
Sting (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 to hit, succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be knocked
reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage, and prone. If lhe largel is prone, the lion can lake a bonus aclion lo
the target must make on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, make one bite attack against it.
taking lO (3d6) poison damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one. Running Leal'. As parI of ils movement and after a 10-foot
running slart, the lion can long jump up to 25 feet.
Invisibility. lhe imp tums invisible until it attacks or until its
concentration ends. Anything the invisible imp is carrying or ACTlONS
wearing is invisible as long as it remains in contact with the imp.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
LION Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage.

Large beast, unaligned Claw. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hit, reach 5 ft., one larget.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.

Armar Class 12 MASTIFF
Hit Points 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 50 ft. Medium beast, unaligned

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Armor elass 12
3 (-3) 12 (+1) 8 (-1) Hit Points 5 (ld8 + 1)
17 (+3) 15 (+2) 13 (+1) Speed 40 ft.

Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6 STR DEX eON INT WIS eHA
Senses passive Perception 13 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 3 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)

Keen Smell. lhe lion has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) Skills Perception +3 13
checks that rely on smell. Senses passive Perception
Languages -
Pack Tacties. The lion has advantage on attack rolls against a ehallenge 1/8 (25 XP)
creature if at least one of the lion's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and isn't incapacitated. Keen Hearing and Smell. The masliffhas advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks thal rely on hearing or smel!.

ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3 lo hit, reach 5 fI., one target. Hit:
4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage. Ifthe larget is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 11 Slrength saving throw or be knocked prone.

MULE

Medium beast, unoligned

Armar elass 10
Hit Poinls 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.

STR DEX eON INT WIS eHA
14 (+2) 10 (+0) 13 (+1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 5 (-3)

Senses passive Perception lO
Languages -
ehallenge 1/8 (25 XP)

Beast ofBurden. lhe mule is considered to be a Large animal
for the purpose of determining its carrying capacily.

Sure.Footed. Whenever the mule would be knocked prone, il
stays on ils feel ifil succeeds on a DC 10 Dexterily saving Ihrow.

ACTIONS
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.

307


OWL POISONOUS SNAKE

Tiny beast, unaligned Tiny beast, unaligned

Armor Class 11 Armor Class 13
Hil Poinls 1 (ld4 - 1) Hil Poinls 2 (ld4)
Speed 5 fI., fly 60 fI. Speed 30 fI., swim 30 fI.

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA STR DEX CON INI WIS CHA
3 (-4) 13 (+1) 8 (-1) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2) 2 (-4) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 1 (-5) 10 (+0) 3 (-4)

Skills Perceplion +3, 51eallh +3 Senses blindsighl10 fI., passive Perceplion 10
Senses darkvision 120 fI., passive Perceplion 13 Languages -
Languages - Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Challenge O (lO XP)

F/yby. lhe owl provokes no opporlunily allacks when il flies ACTIONS
oul of an enemy's reach.
Bile. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Keen Sight. lhe owl has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion) Hit: 1 piercing damage, and lhe largel musl make a DC 10
checks Ihal rely on sighl. Conslilulion saving Ihrow, laking 5 (2d4) poison damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
ACTIONS
Talons. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel. PSEUDODRAGON
Hit: 1 slashing damage.
Tiny dragon, neutral good

PANTHER Armor Class 13 (nalural armor)
Hil Poinls 7 (2d4 + 2)
Medium beast, unaligned Speed 15 fI., fly 60 ft.

Armor Class 12 STR DEX CON INI WIS CHA
Hil Poinls 13 (3d8) 6 (-2) 15 (+2) 13 (+1) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 10 (+0)
Speed 50 fI., c1imb 40 fI.

SIR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Skills Perceplion +3, 51eallh +4
15 (+2) 10 (+0) 3 (-4) 14 (+2) 7 (-2) Senses blindsighl10 fI., darkvision 60 fI., passive Perceplion 13
14 (+2) Languages underslands Common and Draconic bul doesn'l

Skills Perceplion +4, 51eallh +6 speak
Senses passive Percepllon 14 Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Languages-
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) Keen Senses. lhe pseudodragon has advanlage on Wisdom
(Perceplion) checks Ihal rely on sighl, hearing, or smell.
Keen Smefl. lhe panlher has advanlage on Wisdom
(Perceplion) checks Ihal rely on smell. Magie Resistanee. lhe pseudodragon has advanlage on saving
Ihrows againsl spells and olher magical effecls.
Pounee. If lhe panlher moves alleasl 20 feel slraighlloward
a crealure righl before hilling il wilh a c1aw allack, lhe largel Limited Te/epathy. lhe pseudodragon can communicale
musl succeed on a DC 12 51renglh saving Ihrow or be knocked sim pie ideas, emolions, and images lelepalhically wilh any
prone. Iflhe largel is prone, lhe panlher can lake a bonus crealure wilhin 100 feel ofillhal can undersland a language.
aclion lo make one bile allack againsl il.
ACTIONS
ACTlONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5 ft., one largel.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Sting. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one crealure.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage, and lhe largel musl succeed
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage. on a DC 11 Conslilulion saving Ihrow or become poisoned for
1 hour. If ils saving Ihrow resull is 6 or lower, lhe largel falls
unconscious for lhe same duralion, or unlil illakes damage or
another creature uses an action to wake it.

308 APPENDlX D I CREATURE STATISTlCS


~UASIT .. ACllONS

Tiny fiend (demon, shapechanger), chaotlC evll Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one targel.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.

Armar Class 13 RAVEN
Hil Poinls 7 (3d4)
Speed 40 fI. (10 fI., fly 40 fI. in bal form; 40 fI., c1imb 40 fI. in Tiny beast, unaligned

cenlipede form; 40 fI., swim 40 fI. in load form)

SlR DEX CON INl WIS CHA Armor Class 12
5 (-3) 17 (+3) 10 (+0) 7 (-2) 10 (+0) 10 (+0) Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 fI.

Skills Sleallh +5 STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
Damage Resislances cold, fire, lighlning; bludgeoning, 2 (-4) 14 (+2) 8 (-1) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 6 (-2)

piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons Skills Perception +3
Damage Immunilies poison Senses passive Perception 13
Condilion Immunilies poisoned Languages -
Senses darkvision 120 fI., passive Perceplion 10 Chalienge O (10 XP)
Languages Abyssal, Common
Chalienge 1 (200 XP)

Shapechanger. lhe quasil can use ils aclion lo polymorph inlo Mimicry. The raven can mimic simple sounds it has heard,
lhe beasl form of a bal, cenlipede, or load, or into its demon such as a person whispering, a baby crying, or an animal
formo Its statistics are lhe same in each form, although its chittering. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they are
altack is different in some oflhem. Any equipment it carries is imitations with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) check.
not transformed. If slain, the quasit reverts lo its demon formo
ACTIONS
Magic Resislance. lhe quasit has advanlage on saving Ihrows
againsl spells and other magical effects. Beak. Me/ee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one targel.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
ACllONS
REEF SHARK
Claws (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lo hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage. Ifthe Medium beost, unaligned
target is a creature, it musl succeed on a DC 10 Constitulion
saving throw or take 5 (2d4) poison damage and become Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
poisoned for 1 minute. lhe crealure can repeat the saving Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
throw at the end of each of its tums, ending the effect early Speed O fI., swim 40 ft.
on a success.
STR DEX CON INl WIS CHA
Scare (ljDay). One creature ofthe quasit's choice within 20 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 13 (+1) 1 (-5) 10 (+0) 4 (-3)
feet ofit must succeed on a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw or be
frightened for 1 minute. lhe target can repeat the saving throw Skills Perception +2
at the end of each of its tums, with disadvantage if the quasit is Senses blindsight 30 fI., passive Perception 12
within line of sight, ending the effect early on a success. Languages -
Challenge 1{2 (100 XP)
Invisibility. lhe quasit tums invisible until it altacks or uses
Scare, or until its concentration ends. Anything the invisible Pack Tacties. The shark has advantage on altack rolls against a
quasit is carrying or wearing is invisible as long as it remains in creature if at least one of the shark's allies is within 5 feet of the
contact with the quasit. creature and isn't incapacitated.

RAT 1

Tiny beast, unaligned Water Breathing. lhe shark can breathe only while u derwater.

Armor Class 10 ACTIONS
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 20 fI. Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one arget.
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
2 (-4) 11 (+0) 9 (-1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 4 (-3)

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge O (10 XP)

Keen Smell. The rat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) I
checks that rely on smell.
APPENDTX D CRFA1 URE fATISTICS
309


RIDING HORSE

Large beast, unaligned

Armor Class 10
Hit Points 13 (2d10 + 2)
Speed GOfI.

STR OEX CON INT WIS CHA
1G (+3) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 11 (+0) 7 (-2)

Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

ACTIONS

Hooves, Melee Weapon Attaek: +2 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage.

SKELETON

Medium undead, lawful evil

Armor Class 13 (armor scraps)
Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4)
Speed 30 fI.

STR OEX CON INT WIS CHA
10 (+0) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) G (-2) 8 (-1) 5 (-3)

Oamage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning Shortbow, Ranged Weapon Attaek: +G to hit, range 40 ft.flGO
Oamage Immunities poison fI., one targel. Hit: 1 piercing damage. If the target is a
Condition Immunities poisoned creature, it must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving
Senses darkvision GOft., passive Perception 9 throw or beco me poisoned for 1 minute. Ifits saving lhrow
Languages understands languages it knew in life but can't speak result is 5 ar lower, the target falls unconscious for the same
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) duration, or until it takes damage ar another creature uses an
action to wake it.
ACTIONS
Heart Sight. The sprite louches a crealure and knows lhe
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature's current emotional state. If the target fails a DC 10
targel. Hit: 5 (ldG + 2) piercing damage. Charisma saving lhrow, the sprite also knows the creature's
alignment. Celestiais, fiends, and undead automatically fail the
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, range 80 fl./320 saving throw.
ft., one targel. Hit: 5 (ldG + 2) piercing damage.

SPRITE Invisibility, The sprite turns invisible until it attacks or casts

Tiny fey, neulral good

a spell, ar until its concentration ends. Anything the invisible

Armor Class 15 (Ieather armor) sprite is carrying ar wearing is invisible as long as it remains in
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 10 fI., fly 40 ft. contact with the sprite.

•• ••
VARIANT: WARHORSE ARMOR
STR OEX CON INT WIS CHA
3 (-4)
18 (+4) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 11 (+O) An armored warhorse has an Armar Class based on the
type of barding worn (se e chapter 5 for more information
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +8 (the check is made with on barding). Its Armar Class includes the horse's Dexterity
disadvantage if the sprite is flying) modifier, where applicable.

Senses passive Perception 13 AC Barding AC Barding
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan 12 Leather 1G Chain mail
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 13 Studded leather 17 Splint
14 Ring mail 18 Plate
ACTIONS 15 Scale mail
Longsword, Melee Weapon Atlaek: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one ••
largel. Hit: 1 slashing damage. ••

APPENDIX D I CREATURE STATlSTICS


TIGER WOLF I

Large beast, una/igned Medium beast, una/igned

Armor Class 12 Armor Class 13 (nalural armar)
Hil Poinls 37 (5d10 + 10) Hil Poinls 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 fI. Speed 40 fI.

WIS CHA --ST-R---O-E-X--C-O-N---IN-T---W-IS--~
12 (+1) 8 (-1)
STR OEX CON INT _12.(.+1.)_.15.(.+2.)_.12.(.+1.) __ 3_(-_4__)1_2_(+_1__)~
17 (+3) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 3 (-4)

Skills Perceplion +3, Sleallh +6 Skills Perceplion +3, Sleallh +4 I
Senses passive Perceplion 13 Senses passive Perceplion 13
Languages - Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

Keen Smell. The liger has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion) IKeen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advanlage on isdom
checks lhal rely on smel!.
(Perceplion) checks lhal rely on hearing or smel!.
Pounce. If lhe liger moves alleasl 20 feel slraighlloward a
crealure righl before hilling il wilh a c1aw allack, lhe largel Pack Tactics. The wolf has advanlage on allack rolls a~ainsl a
musl succeed on a DC 13 Slrenglh saving Ihrow or be knocked crealure if alleasl one of lhe wolf's allies is wilhin 5 fe Iof lhe
prone. If lhe largel is prone, lhe liger can lake a bonus aclion crealure and isn'l incapacilaled.
lo make one bile allack againsl il.
ACTlONS
ACTIONS
Bile. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel. Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lO hil, reach 5 ft., one I rgel.
Hit: 8 (ld10 + 3) piercing damage. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. Iflhe largel is a crea ure,
il musl succeed on a DC 11 Slrenglh saving lhrow or lle
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel. knocked prone.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage.
ZOMBIE

Medium undead, neutral evil

WARHORSE Armor Class 8
Hil Poinls 22 (3d8 + 9)
Large beast, unaligned Speed 20 fI.

Armar Class 11 STR OEX CON INT WIS CHA
Hil Poinls 19 (3d10 + 3) 13 (+1) 6 (-2) 16 (+3) 3 (-4) 6 (-2) 5 (-3)
Speed 60 fI.

STR OEX CON INT WIS CHA Saving Throws Wis +0
18 (+4) 12 (+1) 13 (+1) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2) Oamage Immunilies poison
Condilion Immunilies poisoned
Senses passive Perceplion 11 Senses darkvision 60 fI., passive Perceplion 8
Languages - Languages underslands lhe languages il knew in life uI can'l
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

Trampling Charge. If lhe horse moves alleasl 20 feel slraighl Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces lhe zombre lo OI hil
loward a crealure righl before hilling il wilh a hooves allack, poinls, il musl make a Conslilulion saving lhrow wilh a DC
lhe largel musl succeed on a DC 14 Slrenglh saving Ihrow ar of 5 + lhe damage laken, unless lhe damage is radian or
be knocked prone. If lhe largel is prone, lhe horse can lake a from a crilical hil. On a success, lhe zombie drops lo 1 hil
bonus aclion lo make anolher allack wilh ils hooves againsl poinl inslead.
lhe largel.
ACTlONS
ACTIONS
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.

APPENDlX D I CREATURf. S ATISTICS 311


ApPENDIX E: INSPIRATIONAL READING

NSPIRATION FORALLOFTHE FANTASYWORK I HAVE Farmer, Philipjose. MakerofUniverses and lhe rest ofthe
dane stems directly from the lave my father World of Tiers series.

r showed when I was a lad, for he spent many Fax, Gardner. Kothar and the Conjurer's Curse and the rest of
hours telling me stories he made up as he went the Kolhar series, and Kyrik and the Lost Queen and the rest
along, tales of cloaked old men who could grant of the Kyrik series.
wishes, of magic rings and enchanted swords,
ar wicked sorcerers and dauntless swordsmen .. Froud, Brian & Alan Lee. Faeries.
. . A11 of us tend to get ample helpings of fantasy Hickman, Tracy & Margarel Weis. Dragons of Autumn TwiJight
when we are very young, fram fairy tales such as those
written by the Brathers Grimm and Andrew Lang. and lhe rest of the Chronicles Trilogy.
This often leads to reading books of mythology. paging Hodgson, William Hope. The Night Land.
thraugh bestiaries, and consultation of compilations Howard, Robert E. The Coming ofConan the Cimmerian and
of the myths of various lands and peoples. Upon such
a base J built my interest in fantasy. being an avid the rest af the Canan series.
reader of a11science fiction and fantasy literature jemisin, N.K. The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms and the
since 1950. The fo11owing authors were ofparticular
inspiration to me. rest of the lnheritance series, The Killing Moon, and The
Shadowed Sun.
-E. Gary Gygax, Oungeon Master's Guide (1979) Jordan, Robert. The Eye of the World and the rest of the Wheel
af Time series.
A greal deal of fanlasy lileralure has been published Kay, Guy Gavriel. Tigana.
since lhe co.crealor of OUNGEONS& ORAGONSwrote King, Stephen. The Eyes ofthe Dragon.
lhose words, including breakthrough works seI in lhe Lanier, Sterling. Hiero'sjourney and The Unforsaken Hiero.
shared worlds of 0&0. The following lisl includes LeGuin, Ursula. A Wizard of Earthsea and the rest of the
Gary's originallisl and some addilional works lhal have Earthsea series.
inspired lhe game's designers in lhe years since. Leiber, Fritz. Swords and Deviltry and the rest of the Fafhrd &
Gray Mouser series.
Ahmed, Saladin. Throne of the Crescent Moon. Lovecraft, H.P. The Complete Works.
Alexander, L1oyd.The Book ofThree and lhe rest of the Lynch, Scott. The Lies of Locke Lamora and the rest of the
Gentlemen Bastard series.
Chronicles af Prydain series. Martin, George RR. A Game ofThrones and the res! ofthe
Anderson, Paul. The Broken Sword, The High Crusade, and Song of Ice and Fire series.
McKillip. Patricia. The Forgotten Beasts of Eld.
Three Hearts and Three Lions. Merritt, A. Creep, Shadow, Creep; DweJlers in the Mirage; and
Anthony, Piers. Split Infinity and the rest of the Apprentice The Moon Pool.
Miéville, China. Perdido Street Station and the other
Adept series. Bas-Lag novels.
Augusta, Lady Gregory. Gods and Fighting Men. Moorcock, Michael. Elric of Melniboné and the rest of the
Bear, Elizabeth. Range ofGhosts and the rest of the Elric series, and Thejewel in the SkuJl and lhe rest of the

Eternal Sky trilogy. Hawkmoon series.
Bellairs,john. The Face in the Frost. Norton, Andre. Quag Keep and Witch World.
Brackett, Leigh. The Best of Leigh Brackett, The Long Offutt, Andrew J., ed. Swords against Darkness fll.
Peake, Mervyn. Titos Groan and the rest of the
Tomorrow, and The Sword of Rhiannon.
Brooks, Terry. The Sword of Shannara and the resl of the Gormenghast series.
Pratchelt, Terry. The Colour of Magic and lhe rest of the
Shannara noveis.
Brown, Fredric. HaJl of Mirrors and What Mad Universe. Discworld series.
Bulfinch, Thomas. Bulfinch's Mythology. Pratt, Fletcher. Blue Star.
Burroughs, Edgar Rice. At the Earth's Core and the rest Rothfuss, Patrick. The Name ofthe Wind and the rest ofthe

ofthe Pellucidar series, Pirates ofVenus and the rest of Kingkiller series.
lhe Venus series, and A Princess of Mars and the rest of Saberhagen, Fred. The Broken Lands and Changeling EartiJ.
the Mars series. Salvatore, RA. The Crystal Shard and the resl of The
Carter, Lin. WarriorofWorlds End and the rest ofthe
World's End series. Legend of Drizzt.
Cook, Glen. The Black Company and the rest of the Black Sanderson, Brandon. Mistborn and the rest of the
Company series.
de Camp, L. Sprague. The FaJJible Fiend and Lest Mislborn trilogy.
Darkness FaJl. Smith, ClarkAshlon. The Return ofthe Sorcerer.
de Camp, L. Sprague & Fletcher Pratt. The Compleat SI. Clair, Margaret. Change the Sky and Other Stories, The
Enchanter and the rest of the Harold Shea series, and
Carnelian Cube. Shadow People, and Sign ofthe Labrys.
Derleth, August and H.P. Lovecraft. Watchers out ofTime. Tolkien,j.R.R The Hobbit, The Lord ofthe Rings. and The
Dunsany, Lord. The Book ofWonder, The Essential Lord
Dunsany CoJlection, The Gods of Pegana, The King of Silmarillion.
Elfland's Daughter, Lord Dunsany Compendium, and The Tolstoy, Nikolai. The Coming ofthe King.
Sword of WeJleran and Other Tales. Vance,jack. The Dying Earth and The Eyes ofthe Overworld.
Weinbaum, Stanley. VaJlcy of Drcams and The Worlds of Ir.
Wellman, Manly Wade. The Golgotha Dancers.
Williamson,jack. The Cosmic Express and The Pygmy Planet.
Wolfe, Gene. The Shadowofthe Torturer and the rest ofThe

Book of the New Sun.
Zelazny, Roger.jack of Shadows and Nine Princes in Amber

and the rest of the Amber series.

APPENDIX E I INSPIRATIONAL READING
312


INDEX Archery. See under fighting styles bear, bfack. See creature statisties Knowledge ofthe Ages l.,.,,'~="~SI:~;eomponent, spell.
Archfey, the (warlock). See under bear, brown. See creature statistics (Knowledge domain), 59 casting a
o hit points. 5ee hít points: Beastlands, lhe. See planes of Preserve Ufe (Ufe domain), 60
dropping to o otherworldly patrons Radianee oflne Dawn (Ught spell: component
area of effect, 204-205 existence domain),61
abilitycheek, 7, 12, 173-179, 186 armor and shields, 144-146 Beast Master (ranger). See under See a/so material pell
contest, 174 Read Thougnls (Knowledge
graup, 175 barding, 155, 310 ranger archetypes domain),59-60 eomponent; som tie spell
passive, 175 casting a spell in. See casting a Beast Speech (warlock). See Turn Undead, 59
skill,174-175 spell: in armor War God's Blessing (War component; verb I spell
skills with different abilities getting into and out of, 146 eldritch invocations doma in), 63
Stealth. 144 Beast Spells (druid), 67 Channel Divinity paladin options, component
(variant), 175 table, 145 Beguiling Defenses (warlock), 109 86-88
working together, 175 ArmorClass (AC), 7, 14, 144, 177 Beguiling Influence (warlock). See Abjure Enemy (Oath of concentration, 203-104
ability modifier, 7, 13. 173 ArmorofShadows (warlock). See Vengeance),88
determining, 13, 173 eldriteh invocations eldritch invocations Nalure's Wrath (Oath ofthe conditions, 290-2921
table. 13, 173 armor proficiency, 144 Bend Luek (sorcerer), 103 Ancients),87
ability seore, 7, 12-13, 173 See olso specific c1QSSentries Benign Transposition (wizard), 116 Saered Weapon (Oath of cone. See area of elfect
custornizing (variant), 13 Artificer's Lore (rock gnome), 37 Bestial Fury (ranger), 93
determining, 12-13 Ascendant Step (warlock). See Bewitching Whispers (warlock). Devotion).86 conjuration, 116, 20l
increase. See under racial traits eldritch invocations Turn the Faithless (Oatll of the school (wizard). ee under
Aspect of the Beasl (barbarian), See eldriteh invocalions Ancients),87
paint cosi lable, 13 50 Blessed Healer (e1erie), 60 Turn the Unholy (Oath of arcane tradilions
rolling,13 Assassin (rogue). See wnder Blessings ofKnowledge (e1erie), 59
slandard sei, 13 roguish archetypes Blessing ofthe Trickster (c1eric), 63 Devotion),86 canjur.ation Savant 'Hizard),116
summary, 12, 173 Assassinate (rogue), 97 blinded. See conditions Vow of Enmity (Oatn of
using, 173-179 Astral Plane. See planes of Blindsense (rogue), 96 conjurer, 116
Ability Seore Improvement. See existence blindsignt, 183 Vengeance),88
specifrc ,Iou entries Athletics (skill). See under bludgeoning damage. See damage chaotic evil. See alignment IConstltution, 12, 17
Strength chaotic goOO. See alignment c~ecks, 177
abjuration, l' 5, 203 attack of opportunity. See types chaotic neutral. See alignment
5chool (wizard). See under opportunity attack boar. See creature statistics character, 5,11-15 hlt points ando S~ h.it points
arcane traditions attack, H, 193-196 bonds. See personality
Attack aetion. See under action bonus, 7 advancement, 15 conlainer capacity, 1.p3
Abjuration Savan! (wizard), 115 attack modifier, 14, 194 bonus aetion, 189 age. See speeific rQce entries
Abjure Enemy (paladin). Set spell. See specific Spel/eosting alignment. See alignment contes!. See under abillty eheek
entries See olso easting a spell; casting crealing a, 11-15
under Channel Divinity paladin attack reli, 7. 14, 176, 177, 194 deseribing your, 13-14 Controlled Chaos (strcerer), 103
options ability modifier, 194 time equipping your, 14, 125,
abjurer, 11 5 Dexterity-based, 177, 194 Book of Ancient Seerets (warlock). 143-157 Converting a spell si t to sorcery
Abyss. lhe. See planes af existente modifiers to, 194 height and weight, 121
Abyssal. See language proficiency bonus, 194 See eldriteh invocations name, 121. See 0/$0 speeific roce points (sorcerer). See Font
AC. See Armor Class rolling a 1, 194 Book ofSnadows (warlock), 108 entries
Acheron. See planes of existenee rolling a 20, 194 Border Etnereal. See planes of personality. See personality of Magic
acid damage. See damage types spell. See spell attack roll sex and gender, 121
acolyte. See under background Strength.based, 176, 194 existence charaeter sheet, 11, 317-319 eopper pieee (cp) S e eoinage
Aeolyte ofNature (elerie), 62 Auran. See language Brave (haIAing), 28 Charisma, 12, 178-179
Aerobaties (skill). See under Aura of Courage (paladin). 85 breaking concentration. See checks, 178-179 Corona of Light (ele c),61
Dexterity Aura of Devotion (paladin), 86 Deception, 178
aetion, 189, 192-193 Aura of Proleetion (paladin), 85 concentration Intimidation, 179 Countercharm (bard , 54
Attack aetion, 192 Aura ofWarding (paladin), 87 Breath ofWinter (monk). See Performance, 179
east a spell. See easting a spell: automatic hit. See attack reli: Persuasion, 179 eover, 196
easting time rolling a 20 Elemental Disciplines eharlatan. See under background
Dash action, 192 automatic miss. See attack rell: Breath Weapon (dragonborn), 34 Charm Animais and plants crafting. See downtite activíty
Disengage aetion, 192 rolling a 1 bright Iignt. See light (elerie). See under Channel crawling. See under ovement
Dodge aetion, 192 Avatar of Battle (elerie), 63 bringing back the dead. See under Divinity elerie options
Help aetion, 192 Avenging Angel (paladin), 88 eharmed. See conditions Create Thrall (warlo k), 110
Hide aetion, 192 Awakened Mind (warlock), 1lO dead eheck. See ability cneck
improvising, 193 background, 11, 12, 1]-14, Brutal CriticaI (barbarian), 49 Chondathan. See human creating a character. See under
Ready aetion, 193 125-141 buli rush. See shoving ethnicities
Search action, 193 acolyte, 127 By Popular Demand (entertainer), Cirele Forms (druid), 69 character I
Use an Objeet aetion, 193 charlatan, 128 (irele ofthe Land (druid). See
Aetion Surge (fighter), 72 criminal. 129-130 130 under druid cireles creating spell slots (torcerer). See
advancement. See undereharacter eustomizing, 125-126 Bytopia. See planes of existence (irele ohhe Moon (druid). See
advantage, 7, 173 enlertainer, 130-131 Calishite. See human ethnieities under druid circles Font of Magic ,
adventure, 5, 7-8 equipment, 125 campaign, 5, 6
See also adventuring folk hero, 131-132 cantrips, 201 Cirele Spells (druid). 68 creature statistics, 304-311
adventurer. See charaeter gladiator (variant), 131 Cily Seerets (urchin), 141
adventuring, 181-187 guild artisan, 132-133 See Q/so Spel1casting: bard; Cleansing Touch (pafadin), 85 criminal. See under ackground
adventuring gear, 148, 150-153 guild merchant (variant), 133 c1eric; druid; fighter, Eldritch Cloak ofShadows (eleric). See
table, 150 hermit, 134-135 Knight; rogue, Areane Trickster; Criminal Contact (c minal),129
age (eharacter). See specific roce languages. 125 sorcerer; warlock; wizard wnder Channel Divinity eleric
entries noble, 135-136 Carceri. See planes of existence options ~~~~~.a~i~~~'S~~6crea~re statistics
Agonizing Blast (warloek). See noble knight (varianl), 136 Careful Spell (sorcerer). See {monk),80 cube. See area of e et
eldritch invocatians outlander, 136-137 Metamagic c1ass,11,45
aHgnment, 122 pirate (variant), 139 carrying capacity. See wnder Iifting choosing a, 11 Cunning Action (ro e). 96
of planes. See planes of proficiencies, 125 features, 11, 15
existence: alignment of sage, 137-138 and earrying proficiencies, 12 eurrent hit points. S e hit poinls:
Alter Memories (wizard), 117 sailor, 139 casting a spell, 201-205 quick build, 11
ammunition (weapon property). soldier, 140--141 See o/so $peeific closs en/ries current
See weapon praperties area of effect, 204-205 c1ear path to the target. See
Animal Handling (skill). See undu spy (variant), 130 at a higher levei, 201 casting a spel1: targeting Cuttmg Words (bar ,54-55
suggested characteristies, 125 attack rolt, 205 Clench ofthe North Wind (monk).
Wisdom urehin,141 casting time, 202 See Elemental Disciplines cylinder. See area af ffect
Aquan. See language Bad Reputation (pirate variant], eombining effeets, 205 eleric, 45, 56-63
Arborea. See planes of existence components, 203 divine domains. See divine damage, 14, 196-197
Arcadia. See planes of existenee 139 duration, 203-204 domains
Arcana (skill). See under barbarian, 45, 46-50 in armor, 201 quick build, 57 at O hit points. ste underdeath
range, 202-203 spelllist, 207-208
Intelligenee primai paths. See primai paths saving throw, 205 climbing. See under movement saving throws
Areane Charge (fighter), 75 quick build, 47 targeting, 204 coinage, 143
areane magic, 205 bard, 45, 51-55 See Q/so specific SpellcQsting cold damage. See damage types damage resistance, 97
eolleges. See bard eolleges entries College ofLore (bard). See undu
See also bard; martial quick build, 52 casting time. See under casting bard colleges Damage Resistance (dragonborn),
arehetypes: Eldritch Knight; spelllist, 207 a spell College ofValor (bard). See under
roguish arehetypes: Areane Bard College (bard), 54 eat. See creature statistics bard colleges 34
Trickster; sorcerer; warlock; bard colleges, 54-55 Celestial. See language Colossus Slayer (ranger). See
wizard Col1ege of Lore, 54-55 centipede, giant. See creature Hunter's Prey damageroll, 14, 17,177,196
Arcane Reeovery (wizard), 115 College ofValor, 55 statistics
Arcane Tradition (wizard), 115 Bardie Inspiration (bard), 53-54 Cnains of Carceri (warlock). See combat, 8, '&9-198 Dexterity-based, 77
arcane traditions, 115-119 barding. See under armor and eldritch invocations mounted,198
School of Abjuration, 115-116 shields Champion (fighter). See under step by step, 189 spell, 196
School ofConjuration, 116 base aUack bonus. See proficiency martial arcnetypes underwater, 198
Sehool of Divination, 116-117 bonus Channel Oivinity (eleric), 58-59 Strength-based, 76
Sehool of Enehantment, 117 base save bonus. See proficiency multielassing ando See under Comhat lnspiration (bard), 55
Sehool of Evoeation, 117-118 bonus multielassing eombat round. See time: round more than one t rget, 196
School af llIusion, 118 bat. See creature slatistics Combat Superiority (fighter), 73
Sehool ofNecromancy, 118- Baule Magic (bard), 55 (paladin),85 Combat Wild Shape (druid), 69 weapon, 14, 196
119 Battle Master (fighter). See wnder See olso Channel Divinity eleric combining spell effects. See
Sehool ofTransmutation, 119 martial archetypes options; Channel Divinity damage types, 196
Areane Trickster (rogue). Su unda casting a spell: combining
roguish archetypes paladin options effects damage vulnerabili ,197
ArcaneWard (wizard), 115 Channel Divinity eleric options, Commander's Strike maneuver
Archdruid (druid), 67-68 (fighter). See maneuvers Damaran. See hum n ethnicities
59-63 Common. See language
Charm Animais and Plants Dampen Elements leric),62
(Nature Domain), 62
Cloak ofShadows (Triekery Danger Sense (bar rian),48
doma in), 63
Destroy Undead, 59 Dark Delirium (war ck),109
Destructive Wrath (Tempest
domain),62 dark elf. See elf
Guided Strike (War domain). 63 darkness. See lighl
lnvoke Duplieity (Triekery
domain),63 Dark One's Blessin (warlock),109

Dark One's Own L k (warlock),

109

darkvision, 183, 18

See o/so speeific ce entries
WlUDash aetion. See
De. See Difficulty C ss action

dead,197

bringing back th . See the spell

descriptionsfor aise dead,

reinearnate, res rredion,

revivify, true res rrection

deafened. See cond tions

death,197

instant, 197

monsters and, 1

Death domain, 293

death saving throw ,197

damage at O hit oints, 197

rolling a 1 or 20 n,197

Death Strike (rogu ,97

Deception (skill). S e under

Charisma

deep gnome. See gome

Deep Speech. See I nguage
Defense. See under ghting styles

Defensive Tacties { nger),93

DeAect Missiles ( nk), 78

dehydration. See fo d and drink:

water requirem nts

deities, 293-299

Celtie, 297, 298

Dragonlance,2 3, 295

Eberron, 293, 2 6

Egyptian, 297- 8, 299

Forgotten Real s, 293, 294

Greek, 297, 298

Greyhawk, 293, 95

1 'OEX

313


nonhuman, 293, 296 druidicfocus, 150. 151 exotic language. See language Giant Kilter (ranger). See Hunter's holy symbol. See Spellcasting:
Norse, 298, 299 See 0150 spellcasting focus: expenses. 157-158, 187 Prey eleric; paladin
See a/so e1eric; druid; paladin druid experience points (XP). 15
demiplanes. See planes of gladiator. See under background Horde Breaker (ranger). See
existence druids ilnd the gods, 69 multielassing and. See /)nder gnome, 35-37 Hunter's Prey
Destroy Undead. See under Dueling. See under fighting styles multiclassing
Channel Divinity e1eric options duergar. See dwarf Expert Divination (wizard), 116 Gnome Cunning (gnome), 37 Morse, riding. See creature
Destruetive Wrath (e1erie). See Dungeon Master (DM), 5 Expertise (bard), 54 statistics
under Channel Divinity e1eric Durable Summons (wizard), 116 (rogue),96 gnome names, 36 See 0150 mounts and vehieles
options duration. See unducasting a spell exploration, 8
Devil's Sight (warloek). Su dwarf, 1&-20 Extended Spell (sorcerer). See gnome traits, 36-37 how to play. See under rules
eldriteh invocations dwarf names, 20 Metamagic Huge. See size category
Dexterity. 12, 176-177 dwarf traits, 20 Extra Attack (barbarian), 49 Gnomish,37 human, 29-31
Acrobatics, 176 (bard), 55 See language human ethnicities, 30--31
checks, 176-177 Owarven Armor Training (fighter), 72 human names, 30, 31
Sleight ofHand, 177 (mountain dwarf), 20 (monk),79 Goading Attack maneuver human traits, 31
Stealth, 177 {paladin),85 (fighter). See maneuvers
Owarven Combat Training, 20 {ranger),92 variant,31
Diamond Soul (monk), 79 Dwarven Resilience, 20 Eyes ofthe Rune Keeper (warlock). gold dwarf. See dwarf Hunter (ranger). See /)nder ranger
d (abbreviation). See dice Dwarven Toughness (hill dwarf), See eldritch invocations gold piece (gp), 14
dice, 6-7 Faerie. Su planes of existence: archetypes
20 Feywild, the See also coinage Hunter's Prey (ranger), 93
d20rd3,7 Owarvish, 20 falling, 183 Gong ofthe Summit (monk). See Hurl Through Hell (warlock), 109
percentile,6 False Identity (charlatan), 128 hustle. See action: Dash action
difficult terrain. See under alphabet, 122 familiar (warlock), 107 Elemental Disciplines Hypnotic Gaze (wizard), 117
movement See O/50 language Fangs ofthe Fire Snake (monk). grappled. See conditions ideais. See personality
Difficulty Class (DC), 7, 174 effect, 201 See Elemental Disciplines grappling, 195 Ignan. See language
typical DCs table, 174 Far Realm. See planes of existence gray dwarf. See dwarf illusion, 118, 203
dim light. See lighl Elder Champion (paladin), 87 Greater Portent (wizard), 117
disadvantage, 7, 173 Eldritch Invocations (warlock), 107 Fast Hands (rogue), 97 Great Old One, the (warlock). See school (wizard). See under
eldritch invocations. 110--111 Fast Movement (barbarian), 49 arcane traditions
Disarming Attack maneuver Eldritch Knight (fighter). See undu Favored Enemy (ranger), 91 under otherworldly patrons illusionist, 118
(fighter). See maneuvers feats, 165-170 Great Weapon Fighting. See under IIlusion Savant (wizard), 118
martial archetypes IIluskan. See numan ethnicilies
Disciple oflife (e1eric), 60 Eldritch Master (warlock), 108 gaining, 165 fighting styles IlIusory Reality (wizard), 118
Disciple ofthe Elements (monk). Eldritch Sight (warlock). See prerequisites, 165 Great Wheel, the. See planes of lllusory Self (wizard), 118
imp. See creature statistics
80 eldritch invocations Feinting Attack maneuver existence Impostor (rogue). 97
Discovery (hermit), 134 Eldritch Spear (warlock). See (fighter). See maneuvers Improved Abjuration (wizard), 115
Disengage action. See under action grid (variant), 192 Improved Combat Superiority
Distant Spell (sorcerer). See eldritch invocations Ferallnstinct (barbarian), 49 (fighter), 74
Eldritch Strike (fighter), 75 Feral Senses (ranger), 92 Grim Harvest (wizard), 118 Improved Criticai (fighter), 72
Metamagic electrum piece (ep). See coinage FeyAncestry (elf) , 23 group checks. See under ability
Distracting Strike maneuver Elemental Affinity (sorcerer), 103 Improved Divine Smite (paladin),
Elemental AUunement (monk). (h,lf-eI0. 39 check 85
(fighter). See maneuvers Guided Strike (eleric). See under
divination, 116-117,203 See Elemental Disciplines Fey Presence (warlock). 108 Improved Duplicity (eleric), 63
Elemental Chaos. See planes of Feywild, the. See planes of Channel Divinity e1eric options Improved Fiare (e1eric), 61
school (wizard). See under guild artisan. See under Improved Minor Illusion (wizard),
areane traditions existence existence
Divination Savant (wizard), 116 Elemental Disciplines (monk), 81 Fiendish Resilience (warlock), 109 background 118
Divine Domain (deric), 58 Elemental Planes. See planes of Fiendish Vigor (warlock). See Guild Membership (guild artisan), lmproved War Magic (fighter), 75
doma in spells, 58 improvised weapons. See under
divine domains, 59 existence eldritch invocations 1lJ
Knowledge, 59-60 Fiend, the (warlock). See /)nder guild merchant. See under weapon
life, 60 Elemental wild Shape (druid), 69 incapacitated. See conditions
light,60-61 elf,21-24 otherworldly patrons baekground Indomitable (fighter), 72
Nature, 61-62 elf names, 22-23 fighter, 45, 70-75 Hades. See planes of existence Indomitable Might (barbarian), 49
Tempest,62 elftraits, 23-24 half cover. See cover Infernal. See language
Trickery, 62-63 ElfWeapon Training, 23, 24 martial archetypes. See martial half-elf, 38-39 Infernallegacy (tietling), 43
War, 63 archetypes Infiltration Expertise (rogue), 97
Divine Health (paladin), 85 Elusive (rogue), 96 quick build, 71 nalr-elf names, 39 initiative, 177, 189
Elvish, 23 Fighting Style (fighter), 72 Inner Planes. See planes of
Divine Intervention (c1eric), 59 (paladin),84 half-elftraits,39
divine magic, 205 alphabet, 123 {ranger),91 existence
See a/so language fighting styles, 72,84,91 halAing, 26-28 Insight (skill). Ser: underWisdom
See o/so cleric; druid; paladin; Elysium. See planes of existence Archery, 72, 91 inspiration, 125
ranger Empowered Evocation (wizard), Defense, 72, 84, 91 HalAing (language), 28 instantaneous (spell duration), 203
diviner,116 117 Dueling, 72, 84, 91 See 0150 language Instinctive Charm (wizard), 117
Divine Sense (paladin), 84 Empowered Spell (sorcerer). See Great Weapon Fighting, 72, 84 Intelligence, 12, 177-178
Divine Smite (paladin), 85 Metamagic Protection, 72, 84 halAing names. 27
Divine Strike (e1eric, life domain), Empty Body (monk), 79 Two-Weapon Fighting, 72, 91 Arcana, 177
60 encnantment, 117, 203 finding a hidden creature, 177 Halfling Nimbleness, 28 checks, 177-178
(e1erie, Tempest domain), 62 sehool (wizard). See under finding a hidden object. 178 History, 177-178
(e1erie, Trickery domain), 63 arcane traditions finesse (weapon property). See halAing traits, 28 Investigation, 178
(e1eric. War domain), 63 Enchantment Savant (wizard), 117 weapon properties half-orc,4Q--41 Nature, 178
DM. See Dungeon Master enchanter, 117 fire damage. See damage types Religion, 178
Dodge action. See under action encounters. See under travei Fist of Four Thunders (monk). See halr-orc names, 41 Intimidating Presence (barbarian),
doma in spells. See under Divine encumbrance. See under lifting Elemental Disciplines 49-50
Domain and carrying Fist of Unbroken Air (monk). See half-orc traits, 41 Intimidation (skill). See under
donning and doffing armar. See entertainer. See under backgrollnd Elemental Disciplines hawk. See creature statistics
armor and shields: getting into Entropic Ward (warlock). 110 Flames ofthe phoenix (monk). healing, 197 Charisma
and out of environment, 183-185 See Elemental Disciplines hearing. See Wisdom: Perception Inure<! to Undeath (wizard), 119
downtime activities, 187 equipment, 14, 125. 143-161 flaws. See personality Investigation (skill). See under
draconians, 34 background,125 Fleet of Foot (wood elf), 24 See O/50 conditions
Draconic, 34 packs, 151 Flexible Casting (sorcerer). See heavily obscured, 183 lntelligence
alphabet, 124 size (variant), 144 Font of Magic heavy (weapon property). See invisible. See conditions
See o/so language starting, 143 Flurry of Blows (monk). See Ki
Draconic Ancestry (dragonborn), See 0150 adventuring gear; flying. See /)nder movement weapon properties See a/50 unseen attackers and
armor and shields: tools; Focused Conjuration (wizard), 116 heavy armor. See armor and targets
3' mounts and vehieles; weapon; Foe Slayer (ranger), 92 Invoke Duplícity (deric). See under
Draconic Presence (sorcerer), 102 ond specifie boelc.ground entries folk hero. See under background shields Channel Divinity e1eric options
Draconic Resilience (sorcerer), 102 under boelc.grounds Font of Inspiration (bard), 54 See a/50 movement: in heavy Jack of Ali Trades (bard), 54
Dragon Ancestor (sorcerer), 102 equipment packs. See under armor jumping. See under movement
dragonborn, 32-34 equipment Font of Magic (sorcerer). 101 Keen Senses (elf), 23
dragonborn names, 33-34 See 0150speeifie c/ou entries: food and drink, 158, 185 heavy weapons and Small Ki (monk), 78
quick build creatures, 147 saving throws, 78
dragonborn traits, 34 Escape the Horde (ranger). See expenses, 158 Ki.Empowered Strikes (monk), 79
Dragon Wings (sorcerer), 103 Defensive Tactics food requirements, 185 height and weight. See under ki points, 78
draw or sheathe a weapon. See escaping a grapple, 195 water requirements, 185 character spells and, 80
Eternal Mountain Defense foraging. See under traveI knighí. See background: noble
objects: using during combat (monk). See Elemental force damage. See damage types Heightened Spell (sorcerer). See knight
Dreadful Word (warlock). See Disciplines forced march. See under knocking a creature out, 198
Ethereal Plane. See planes of movement Metamagic KnowYour Enemy (fighter), 73-74
eldritch invocations existence forest gnome. See gnome Hellish Resistance (tiefling), 43 Knowledge domain (e1eric). See
drink (expenses). 158 Evasion (monk), 79 Frenzy (barbarian), 49 Help action. See under action under divine domains
drop an object. See objects: using (ranger). See Superior Hunter's frigntened. See conditions hermit. See under background Knowledge ofthe Ages (e1eric).
frog. See creature statistics hidden, 177, 178 See under Channel Divinity
during combat Defense gaining a levei, 15 eleric options
drow. See elf (rogue),96 Gargantuan. See size category See a/50 Dexterity: Stealth; land's Stride (druid), 69
Drow Magic, 24 Evasive Footwork maneuver Gaze ofTwo Minds (warlock). See finding a hidden creature; (ranger),92
druid, 45. 64-69 (fighter). See maneuvers eldritch invocations language, 17, 123, 125
evocation, 117-118,203 Gehenna. See planes of existence finding a hidden object; hiding; Druidic. See Druidic
druid cireles. See druid cireles school (wizard). See undu gender. See character: sex and unseen attackers and targets thieves' can!. See thieves' cant
quick build, 65 arcane traditions gender Hide action. See under action large. See size category
spelllist. 208 Evocation Savant (wizard), 117 getting into and out of armor. See Hide in Plain Sight (ranger), 92 lawful evil. See alignment
Druid Cirele, 67 evoker, 117 undu armor and shields lawful good. See alignment
druid cireles, 68-69 Exceptional Training (ranger), 93 Giant. See language hiding, 177 lawful neutral. See alignment
Cirele ofthe land, 68-69 exception-based rules. See under hign elf. See elf lay on Hands (paladin), 84
Cirele ofthe Moon, 69 rules hill dwarf. See dwarf learning spells. See specifie
Druidic,66 exhaustion, 181, 185, 291
hirelings, 159
History (skill). See under

Intel1igence

Hit Dice, 12
multielassing ando See under
multielassing
See also speeifie c/oss entries

hit point maximum, 12, 15, 177

hit pOints, 12, 13, 15, 177,

196-198

Constitution and, 177
current, 196
damage at O. See under death
saving throws

droppingtoO, 197-198

increasing with leveI, 15
multiclassing ando See under
multielassing

starting. 12, 13
subtracting damage from, 196

temporary.198
holding breath. See suffocating
Holy Nimbus (paladin), 86

INDEX


Spe/lco~ting entrie5 Elemental Disciplines 159,185,189,198 existence ral. See creature statis ics
lethal damage. See damage Misty Escape (warlock), 109 nonlethal damage. See damage Portent (wizard), 116 raven. See creature st.tistics
levei, 11, 15 Misty Visions (warlock). See Potent Canlrip (wizard), 117
life domain (deric). See under N Pc. See nonplayer character reach (creature), 1951
eldritch invocations Potent Spellcasting (c1eric, reach (weapon pro~e1Y)' See
divine domains modifier,7 Oalh of Devotion (paladin). See Knowledge domain), 60
lifedrinker (warlock). See eldrilch under sacred oaths (c1eric, light domain), 61 Iweapon propertles
ability, 7
invocations bonus, 7 Oath of the Ancients (paladin). Precision Attack maneuver reaction, 190
lifestyle. See e.penses penalty, 7 See tmder sacred oaths (fighter). See maneuvers
lifting and carrying, 176 monastic orders, 81 R,,~~~::g':,:"(~~,:;r~:,,::::,g
Monastic Tradition (monk), 78 Oath ofVengeance (paladin). See preparing spel1s. See Spellcasting:
carrying capacity, 176 monastic traditions, 79-81 under sacred oaths c1eric: druid; paladin; wizard Channel Divlnity c1;ric oplions
Way of the Open Hand, 79-80
encumbrance (variant), 176 Way of Shadow, 80 oath spells. See under Sacred Oath Preserve life (cleric). See under
Way of the Four Elements, Channel Divinity cleric options
size and, 176 80-81 objects, 185 Ready adion. See undfr action
monk, 45,76-81 Primai Champion (barbarian), 49
lighl,183 monastic traditions. See attacking, 185 Primai Patn (barbarian), 48 Reckless Attack (barb rian), 48
light (weapon property). See monastie lraditioos primai palhs, 49-50
quick build, 77 interacting with, 185 recovering ammunitiqn.
weapon properties monk weapons, 78 Path ofthe Berserker, 49-50 See weapon prope ties:
light armor. See armor and shields moon elf. See elf using during combat, 190 Path oflhe Totem Warrior, 50
light domain (c1eric). See under mount. See mounts and vehicles ane with Shadows (warlock). See ammunition
mountain dwarf. See dwarf PrimaI Strike (druid), 69 recuperating. See do
divine domains Mount Celestia. See planes of eldrilch invocations Primeval Awareness (ranger), 92
existence Primordial. See language
lightly obscured, 183 mounted combal. See under Open Hand Technique (monk), 79 profession. See downtime activity activity
lightning damage. See damage combat open locks. See thieves' tools proficiencies, 11, 12, 14, 155
mounts and vehicles, 155, 157 refitling plate armor.
types See a/ro under movement multiclassing ando See under
limbo. See planes of e.istence move aelion. See movement Opportunist (monk), 80 multiclassing plate armor
line. See area of effect movement, 181-183, 190--192 saving throw, 14
line of sighl. See casting a spelJ: around ereatures, 191 opportunity attaek, 195 skHl, 14 Relentless (fighter), 7
breaking up, 190 spell,14
targeting dimbing, 182, 190 OrC,41 tool,14 Relentless Avenger (p,!.Iadin), 88
Iion. See erealure statisties crawling, 182, 191 See 0150 language vehicle, 155
listening. See Wisdom: Pereeption combat, 190-192 weapon,14 Relentless Endurance ~half-orc), 41
difficult terrain, 182, 190 orison. See cantrip proficiency bonus, 14, 173-174,
Ste a/ro eonditions flying, 191 Relentless Rage (bar])arian), 49
loading (weapon property). See prone, 190-191 Dtherworldly leap (warlock). 194
forced march, 181 See adding, 14, 173 lReliable Talent (rogue!. 96
weapon properties in heavy armor, 144 dividing, 14, 173-174
lock, opening or pieking. See jumping, 182, 190 eldritch invocations religion, 293
mounts and vehicles, 181-182 increasing with levei, 15 See 0150 cleric: dru d; paladin
thieves' tools size, 191-192 Otherwordly Patron (warlock), 107 multidassing ando See under
speed, 14, 17, 181 multiclassing Religion (skitl). See u~der
lodging (expenses), 158 otherworldly patrons, 108-110 multiplying, 14, 173-174
lolth, 24, 296 squeezing, 192 Projecled Ward (wizard), 115 Intelligence
long resto See resting sland up, 190-191 Archfey, lhe, 108-109 projectile weapon. See weapon reloading. ~ee weapo properties:
lower Planes. See planes of swimming, 182, 190 properties: ammunition
travei pace, 181 Fiend, the, 109 prone, 190-191
existenee using diFferent speeds, 190 See a/50 conditions
low.light vision. See darkvision moving a grappled creature, 195 Greal Old Dne, the, 109-110 Protection. See tmderfighting styles ammunllion
Mulan. See human ethnicities Outer Planes. See planes of pseudodragon. See crealure See 0150 objects: u ing during
lueky (halfling), 28 mule. See creature statistics stalistics
Multiattack (ranger), 93 existence psychic damage. See damage types combat; weapon Rroperties:
lunging Attack maneuver Multiattack Defense (ranger). See outlander. See under background punching. See under melee attack
(fighler). See maneuvers Defensive Tactics Outlands, lhe. See planes of Purity of Body (monk), 79 loading
multiclassing, 163-164 Purity ofSpirit (paladin), 86
Mage Hand legerdemain Channet Divinity, 164 existence Pushing Attack maneuver Remarkable Athlete ( ghter), 72
(fighter). See maneuvers Repelling Blast (warl ek). See
(rogue),98 e.perience points, 163 quasit. See crealure statistics
hit points and Hit Dice, 163 Overchannel (wizard), 118 quick build, 11 eldritch invocatio s
Magical Ambush (rogue), 98 Pact Magic, 16-4 owl. See creature statistics See 0150 under specific c1a55 researeh. See downti e activity
Magical Seerets (bard), 54 prerequisites, 163 entries
proficiencies, 163-164 Pact Boon (warlock), 107-108 Quickened Spell (soreerer). See Researcher (sage), 1 8
magic, 8, 201-289 proficieney bonus, 163 Metamagie resistanee. See dama e resistance
See a/so specific c1ass entries spell slots, 164 Pael ofthe Blade, 107-108 Quivering Paim (monk), 80
Spcllcasting, 164 race, 11
magic item. See underwealth speJls known and prepared, 164 Pact ofthe Chain, 107 choosing a, 11, 17 resting, 186
magic-user. See wizard Unarmored Defense, 164 traits. See racial traits restrained. See condi ions
multiverse, 5-6, 293, 300 Pael ofthe Tome, 108 See a/so 5pecific roce entrie5 resull. See lolal
See 0150 arcane magie racial ability score increase. See
Malleable lIIusions (wizard), 118 Mystic Arcanum (warloek), 108 Your Pact Boon, 108 racial traits: ability score
name. See under character
maneuver (fighter), 73 Natural Explorer (ranger), 91 Pact Magic (warlock), 107 increase Retainers (noble vari nt), 136
Naturallllusionist (forest gnome), multiclassing ando See under racial traits, 11, 17
Maneuvering Attaek maneuver Retaliation (barbaria ), 50
(fighter). See maneuvers J7 multiclassing ability seore increase, 11, 12, Ride the Wind (mon . See
Naturally Stealthy {Iightfoot 13, 17
maneuvers, 73, 74 pact weapon (warlock), 107-108 age, 17 Elemental Discipl nes
halfling),28 alignment, 17 Riposte maneuver (fi nler). See
list, 74 Natural Recovery (druid), 68 paladin, 45, 82-88 languages, 17
Nalure (skill). See under size, 17
saving throws, 73 quick build, 83 speed,17 maneuvers
mapping. See under travei Intelligence sacred oaths. See sacred oaths subrace, 17 Ritual Casting. See S ellcasting:
marching order. See tmder travei Nature domain (cleric). See under See a/50 specific roce
Martial Archetype (fighter), 72 spel1lis1. 208-209 entries bard; c1eric; druid wizard
divine domains Pandemonium. See planes of Radiance ofthe Oawn (cleric). See See 0150 feals
martial archetypes, 72-75 Nature's Sanetuary (druid), 69 underChannel Divinity cleric
Nature's Ward (druid), 69 existence options rituais, 201-202
Battle Master, 73-74 Nature's Wrath (paladin). See radiant damage. See damage types See 0/50 casting a pell: casting
panther. See ereature statisties Rage (barbarian), 48
Champion, 72-73 under Channel Divinity paladin paralyzed. See eonditions Rally maneuver (fighler). See time
options maneuvers
Eldritch Knight, 74-75 navigaling. See under travei Parry maneuver (fighler). See range, 195 River of Hungry Fia e (monk).
necromancer, 118-119 maximum, 147
Martial Arts (monk), 78 necromancy, 118, 203 maneuvers ,See Elemental Oi iplines
martial weapon. See weapon school (wizard). See under normal. 147
areane traditions party (adventuring), 15 of spells. See casting a spell: rock gnome. See gn
categories Necromancy Savant (wizard), 118 range
necrotic damage. See damage passive check. See under ability range (weapon property). See rogue, 45, 94-98
Mask of Many Faces (warloek). types weapon properlies
See eldritch invocations Negative Plane. See planes of cheek ranged attack, 195 quick build, 95
existence Path of the Berserker. See under in melee, 195
Mask oflheWild (wood eU), 24 neutral. See alignment ranged weapon, 14, 146, 149, 195 roguish archetyp See roguish
neutral evil. See alignmenl
Masler of Myriad Forms neutral good. See alignment primai paths ranger, 45, 89-93 archetypes
(warloek). See eldriteh Nine Hells, lhe. See planes of Path ofthe Totem Warrior. See quick build, 90
invoealions e.istenee ranger archetype. See ranger Roguish Archetype ( gue),96
noble. See under background archetypes
Master of Nature (c1erie), 62 noble knight. See under under primai palhs spelllisl, 209 roguish archetypes, 7-98
background Patient Defense (monk). See Ki
Master Transmuter (wizard), 119 nonplayer character (NPC), 8, Ranger Archetype (ranger), 92 Arcane Trickster, 7-98
mastiff. See ereature statistics ranger archetypes, 93
Peerless Skill (bard), 55 Assassin,97
See 0150 mounts and vehicles Beast Mastl':r, 93
material spell component, 203 penalty,6 Hunter,93 Thief,97
Material Plane. See planes of percentile (dice). See underdice Ranger's Companion (ranger), 93
Perception (skill). See under Rasnemi. See numan ethnicities roleplaying, 8,185-1
existenee
Mechanus. See planes of existenee Wisdom roll,6-7
Medicine (skilt). See under See 0150 travei: noticing threats round. See under ti

Wisdom rounding numbers,
Medium. See size category
medium armor. See armor and Perfect Self (monk), 79 rowed vessel, 155-1
Performance (skill). See under
shields rules,6-7

melee attaek, 195 Charisma exceptions, 7

unarmed,195 Persistent Rage (barbarian), 49 how to play, 6

with a weapon that requires personality (character), 122-124 specific beats ge eral, 7
ammunition, 147 Persuasion (skill). See under run. See action: Das action

reach,195 Charisma Rush ohhe Cale Spi its (monk).
melee weapon, 14, 146, 149, 195 See Elemental Oi ciplines
petrified. See conditions
Menacing (half-orc), 41 pick locks. See thieves' tools Rustic Hospitality (~ Ik hero), 131
pick pockets. See Dexterity: Sleight
Menacing Attack maneuver Saered Oatn (paladi ),85
(fighler). See maneuvers
ofHand oatn spells, 85
Metamagie (soreerer), 101-102 piercing damage. See damage
sacred oaths, 85-88
Military Rank (soldier), 140
Mindless Rage (barbarian), 49 types breaking, 86
Minions ofChaos (warlock). See pirale. See under background
Dath of Oevotio 85-86
eldritch invocations
Minor Alchemy (wizard), 119 planar travei, 301 Oath of the Anci nts, 86-87
plane of Air. See planes of
Minor Conjuration (wizard), 116 Oath ofVengean e,87-88
Mire lhe Mind (warloek). See
e.istence sacred plants and w d (druid), 66
eldritch invocations plane of Earth. See planes of Sacred Weapon (pai din). See
Mist Stanee (monk). See
e.istence under Channel O inity paladin
Plane of Faerie. See planes of
options
e.istence sage. Set under bac round
plane of Fire. See planes of sailor. See under bac ground

existence Savage Attacks (hal orc),41
Plane ofShadow. See planes of save. See saving thr w

existence saving throw, 7, 12, 79,205
Plane ofWater. See planes of death. See death aving throws
ki. See ki: saving hrows
existenee maneuver. See neuvers:

planes of existence, 5, 300-303 saving throws
plalinum piece (pp). See coinage proficiency. See oficiencies:
player eharacter. See character
point of origino See area of effect saving throw
poison damage. See damage types spell. See spell s ving throws
poisoned. See conditions
saving throw modifi r, 12, 179,

Position of Privilege (noble), 135 205
Positive Plane. See planes of

INDEX

3'5


School of Abjuration (wizard). See Slow fali (monk). 78 spider, giant. See creature tiefling.42-43 Upper Planes. See planes ef
under arcane traditions Small. See size category statislics tiefling names, 43 existence
snake, constrictor. See creature tiefling traits, 43
School of Conjuration (wizard). Spirit Seeker (barbarian), 50 tiers of play, 15 urchin. See under background
See under arcane traditions statistics Spirit Walker (barbarian), 50 tiger. See creature statistics Use an Objecl action. See under
snake, poisonous. See creature time, 181
School of Divination (wizard). See Split Enchantment (wizard), 117 action
under arcane traditions statistics sprite. See creature statistics day, 181
Sneak Attack (rogue). 96 spy. See under background minute, 181 Use Magic Device (rogue), 97
School of Enchantment (wizard). social interaction. 8,185-186 squeezing. See under movement round. 181, 189
See under arcane traditions soldier. See underbackground stabili.zing a creature, 197 turn, 189 using this book, 6
somatic spell component, 203 Timeless 80dy (druid), 67
School of Evocation (wizard). See Song of Rest (bard), 54 stable, 197-198 (monk),79 Vanish (ranger), 92
under arcane traditions sorcerer, 45, 99-104 staeking. See casting a speJl: Tinker (roek gnome), 37 vehicle. See mounts and vehicles
Tiny. See size category verbal spell component, 203
School of IIlusion (wizard). See quick build, 100 combining effects Tongue oftne Sun and Moon versalile (weapon property). See
under arcane traditions sorcerous origino See soreerous See 0150 advantage; (monk),79
origins disadvantage tools, 154 weapon properties
School of Necromancy (wizard). spell list, 209 standard action. See action total, 7
See under arcane traditions Sorcerous Origino 101 standard language. See language total cever. See cover Versatile Trickster (rogue), 98
sorcerous origins, 102-104 Stand Against the Tide (ranger). Totemic Attunement (barbarian), vision, 183
School ofTransmutation (wizard). Draconic Bloodline, 102-103 See Superior Hunter's Defense 50
See under areane traditions Wild Magic, 103-104 starting wealth. See underweallh Totem Spirit (barbarian), 50 See 0150 blíndsight; darkvision;
Sorcerous Restoration, 102 starvation. See food and drink: tracking. See undertravel truesight; Wisdom: Perceplion
sehools of magic. See areane Sorcery Points (sorcerer). See Font food requirements trade goods, 144, 157 Visions of Distant Realms
traditions ofMagic Stealth (skill). See under Dexterity training. See downtime activity (warlock). See eldritch
Sou I ofVengeance (paladin), 88 See a/50 armor and shields: traits. See under personality invocations
Sculptor of Flesh (warloek). See space. See under size Stealth; hiding; travei See a/50 spec!fic roce troít entries
eldritch invoeations Speak with Small Beasts (forest Steel Will (ranger). See Defensive Trance (elf), 23 Visions ofthe Past (cleric), 60
gnome),37 Tactics Transitive Planes. See planes of
Seulpt Spells (wizard), 117 special (weapon property). See Step ofthe Wind (monk). See Ki existence Voice ofthe Chain Master
weapon properties StiIJness of Mind (monk), 79 Tranquility (monk), 80 (warJock). See eldritch
Second.Story Work (rogue), 97 speed. See under movement transmutation, 119,203 invocations
See a/50 mounts and vehieles; Stonecunning (dwarf), 20 school (wizard). See under
Second Wind (fighter), 72 radal traits; travei arcane traditions Volley (ranger). See Multiattack
Search action. See under action speJl,201 Stormborn (cleric), 62 Transmutation Savant (wizard), Vow of Enmity (paladin). See
searching. See under travei spell attack modifier. See spec!fic 119
Spellcosling entries Stout Resilience (stout halfling), transmuter, 119 under Channel Divinity paladin
See 0/50 IntelJigence: 28 Transmuter's Stone (wizard), 119 options
spell attack roll, 205 traps, finding. See Wisdom: vulnerability. See damage
Investigation; Wisdom: See a/so spec!fic Spellcasting Strength, 12, 175-176 Perception vulnerability
entries See 0150 Intelligence:
Perceplion Athletics, 175 Wanderer (outlander), 136
self. See casting a spell: range; Spell Bombardment (sorcerer), 103 Investigation
Spellbook (wizard), 114 checks, 175 traps, removing or disabling. See Warding Fiare (cleric), 61
targeting spellcaster.201 War domain (cleric), See under
selling treasure. See under wealth spellcasting, 201-205 Stroke of luck (rogue), 96 thieves' tools
services, 159 Spellcasting (bard), 52-53 strongheart halfling. See halfling: travei. 181-183 divine domains
sexo See character: sex and gender War God's Blessing (cleric). See
Shadow Arts (monk), 80 (e1eric), 58 stout drawing a map, 183
Shadowfell, the. See planes ef (druid),66 encounters, 183 under Channel Divinity cleric
(fighter, Eldritch Knight), 75 Student ofWar (fighter), 73 foraging, 183 options
existenee (paladin),84-85 stunned, See conditions marching order, 182 warhorse. See creature statistics
(ranger),91-92 See 0150 mounts and vehicles
Shadow Step (monk), 80 (rogue, Arcane Trickster), Stunning Strike (monk), 79 navigating, 183 War Magic (fighter), 75
97-98 subrace, 17 noticing threats, 182-183 War Priest (deric), 63
Shapechanger (wizard), 119 Subtle Spell (sorcerer), See WaterWhip (monk). See
(sorcerer),101 pace, 181 Elemental Disciplines
Shape the Flowing River (monk). (warlock). See Pact Magic Metamagic searching, 183
See Elemental Disciplines (wizard), 114 stealtn, 182 warlock, 45, 105-111
See 0150 under multiclassing suffocating, 183 surprise, 183
Share Spells (ranger), 93 spellcasling ability, 178, 179,205 sun elf. See elf tracking, 183 quick build, 106
shark, reef. See creature statistics See 0150spec!fic Spel/costing Sunlight Sensitivity (drow), 24 Trickery doma in (clericJ. See under otherworldly patrono See
Shelter ofthe Faithful (acolyte), entries divine domains otherworfdly patrons
spellcasting focus. See Superior Criticai (fighter), 73 trinkets, 160-161
127 Spellcasting: bard; e1er!c; Trip AUack maneuver (fighter). See spell Iist, 210
shield. See armor and shields druid; paladin; sorcerer; Superior Darkvision (drow), 24 maneuvers Wave of Rolling Earth (monk). See
shield dwarf. See dwarf: mountain warlock; wlzard truesight, 185
Ship's Passage (sailor), 139 spell components. See easting a Superior Hunter's Defense Turami. See numan ethnicities Elemental Disciplines
short rest. See resting spell: components turno See under time
Sheu. See human ethnidties See 0150 material spell (ranger),93 turn, taking yeurs, 189-190 wealth,143-144
shoving, 195 componenl; somatic spell See a/50 action; bonus action;
Sigil. See planes of existenee compenent; verbal spell Superior Inspiration (bard), 54 movement magic item, 144
Signature Spells (wizard), 115 component Turn the Faithless (paladin). See
silvered weapon. See under spell descriptions, 211-289 superiority dice (fighter), 73 under Chanoel Divinity paladin sellíng treasure, 144
spell leveI, 201 options
weapon spell list, 207-211 Supreme Healing (cleric), 60 Turn the Unholy (paladin). See slarting, 143
silver piece (sp). See coinage under Channel Divinity paladin See a/50 expenses
simple weapon. See weapon Spell Mastery (wizard). 115 Supreme Sneak (rogue). 97 options weapon, 14, 146-148, 149
spell preparation. See Turn Undead. See undu Channel
categories surprise, 189 Dívinity e1eric options improvised,147-148
Spellcasting: e1eric; druid; See a/50 travei: surprise Twinned Spell (sorcerer). See
size, 176, 191-192 paladin: wizard Metamagic silvered,148
and weapons. See weapon See 0150 under multiclassing Survival (skill). See underWisdom two.handed (weapon property).
properties: heavy SpelJ Resislance (wizard). 116 See 0/50 traveI: foraging, See weapon properties table, 149
lifting and carrying. See lifting spell save DC, 205 two.weapon fighting, 195
and carrying: size and See a/50 spec!fic Spellcosling navigating, or tracking Weapon Bond (fighter), 75
of equipment. See equipment: entries Survivor (fighter), 73 Two.Weapon Fighting (class
size svirfneblin. See gnome feature). See undu fighting weapon categories, 146
spell saving throws, 205 Sweeping AUack maneuver styles
space, 191-192 spells known, 201 weapon preficiency, 14, 146
See 0150 racial traits; and (fighter). See maneuvers unarmed. See under melee attack See 0/50 spec!fic classes:
spec!fic roce trail entries See a/50 Spellcasting: bard; Sweeping Cinder Strike (monk). Unarmored Defense (barbarian), proficiencies; and spec!fic roce
size category, 191 fighter, Eldritch Knight; ranger; traít entries
skeleton. See creature statistics rogue, Arcane Trickster; See Elemental Disciplines 48
skill check. SeI! ability check: skill sorcerer; warlock; ond Sylvan. See language (monk),78 weapon properties, 146-147
multiclassing targeting a spetl. See casting a Unarmored Movement (monk), 78
Skill Versatility (half.elf), 39 spell slots, 201 Uncanny Dodge (ranger). See Weave, the, 205
skills with different abilities See a/50 specific Spellcosting spell: targeting Superior Hunter's Defense Whirlwind Attack (ranger). See
entries; ond multielassing
(variant). See under abihty check Spell Thief (rogue), 98 target number, 7 (rogue),96 Multiatlack
slashing damage. See damage sphere. See area of effect Undead Thralls (wizard), 119
Armor Class (AC), 7 Underdark, 17 Whispers ofthe Grave (warlock).
types Undying Sentinel (paladin), 87 See eldritch invocations
Sleight ofHand (skill). See under Difficulty Class (DC). 7 uncommon races, 33
Tempest doma in (cleric). See unconscious, 197, 198 Wholeness ofBody (monk), 79-80
Dexterity wild elf. See elf
underdivine domains See a/50 conditions wild Magic (sorcerer). See under
Slippery Mind (rogue), 96 temporary hlt points. See undu Undercommon. See language
underwater combato See undu sorcerous origins
hit points
combat Wild Magic Surge (sorcerer), 103
Tenets of Devotion (paladin), 86 unseen attackers and targets,
table, 104
Tenets ofthe Ancients (paladin), 194-195
Wild Shape (druid), 66-67
86-87
Wisdom, 12, 178
Tenets ofVengeance (paladin), 88
Terran. See language Animal Handling, 178
Tethyrian. See human ethnicities
THACO. See attack roll checks, 178
Thief (rogue). See undu roguish
Insight, 178
archetypes
Toief of Five Fates (warlock). See Medicine, 178

eldrítch invocatíons Perception, 178

Thief's Reflexes (rogue), 97 Survival, 178
Witch Sight (warlock). See eldritch
thieves' cant (rogue), 96
thieves' 10015, 154 invocations

Third Eye, The (wizard), 116-117 wizard, 45, 112-119
Thirsting Blade (warlock). See arcane tradition. See arcane
Iraditions
eldritch invocations
Thought Shield (warlock), 1lO quick build, 113
spell Iist, 210-211
Theusand Forms (druid), 69 wolf, dire. See creature statístics
three.quarters cover, See cover wolf. See creature statistics
thrown (weapon property). See wood elf. See elf
world, 5-6, 8
weapon properties See also planes ef existence:
Thunderbolt Strike (cleric), 62 Material Plane
tnunder damage. See damage
Wrath ofthe Storm (e1eric), 62
types XP. See experience points
lides ofChaos (sorcerer), 103 Ysgard. See planes of existence
zombie. See creature statistics


WHAT COMES NEXT? Bring your games to life with a suite of enhancements
from a robust set of player and DM digital tooIs to
J~AVINGDELVEDINTOTHEDEPTHSOF accessories Iike miniatures, vinyl mats, campaign maps,
character creation, it's time to consider clothing, and more.
your next steps. The fun of D&D is in
playing the game, not just making up It isn't always possible to gather a regular gaming
characters (though that's fun, too). group. In such situations, DUNGEONS& DRAGONS
The Starter Set is a great next step if you want to try board games present an ideal casual play experience.
your hand at being a Dungeon Master and introduce Vou'lI also find a variety of digital games that offer
your friends to lhe game. lf you don't know any DMs, try a D&D experience across Mac, PC, tablets, and
taking on that role yourself. The Starter Set is the best mobile devices.
place to begin your journey.
.rJV~=========::;::~'b
The D&D basic rules include some of the information LEVEL UP YOUR 0&0 GAME BY VISITING
provided in this book, along with the material necessary
to create your own campaign. After absorbing the DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.COM
Starter Set, check out the D&D basic rules, available as
a free download at DungeonsandDragons.com. TO SEE THE SUITE OF

The Monster Manual describes the most important DUNGEONS & DRAGONS OFFERINGS.
monsters in the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSuniverse.
The manual is aimed at DMs, but it's also a useful
reference for players.

The Dungeon Master's Cuide is the ultimate tome
of DM lore. lt includes magic items, optiona! rules,
and guidelines for creating everything from a sim pie
dungeon to an entire cosmos for your campaign.

Each year brings the publication of new D&D
adventures. These scenarios and campaigns are the
perfect way to try your hand at running a D&D game
with a minimum of work.

Looking for a regular D&D game or prefer dropping in
when you have time? Check the Store and Event Locator
on our website to see if your local game store is running
events such as D&D Encounters or D&D Expeditions.

WHAT COMES NEXT